Baltic Online
Series Introduction
Virginija Vasiliauskiene, Lilita Zalkalns, and Jonathan Slocum

Baltic Peoples
The term 'Baltic' as a common name for Latvian, Lithuanian, and Old Prussian was first used by the German linguist Ferdinand Nesselman in 1845. This name was derived from the Baltic Sea. Lithuanian belongs to the Indo-European family, and is descended from the East Baltic branch. Only Lithuanian and Latvian have survived from this large family. The Baltic, the Slavic, and the Germanic languages have many common traits; there are even more similarities among the Baltic and Slavic languages. These similarities have given rise to various theories: some researchers claim there was a common Balto-Slavic stage after the break-up of the Proto-Indo-European, others consider them to have resulted from convergence.

Archaeological data show that a large part of northeastern Europe, approximately from Moscow to Berlin including the northen part of the Dniepr Basin, was Baltic-speaking territory during the 1st millennia B.C. and A.D. Slavs entered this area later. This territory was covered by near-impenetrable forests and was far from the major migration and more important trade routes. These factors facilitated the preservation of an extremely archaic language family.

Lithuanian Origins and Geographic Location
Lithuanians are first mentioned in historical sources at the beginning of the 11th century. The name "Lithuania" is mentioned for the first time in 1009 A.D. in the Quedlinburgh chronicles ("Annales Quedlinburgenses"), written in Latin as "Litua." A bit later, this name starts appearing in Russian chronicles (Russian "Litva"). From the end of the 12th century, Lithuania is mentioned frequently in source materials of Poland and Germany. The forms of the Slavic tradition (with root i instead of ie) became dominant in German (cf. "Litauen") and Latin (cf. "Lituania").

Researchers tend to localize the ethnographic Lithuanian teritory in the area between the Neris, Nemunas, and Merkys rivers. The name Zemaitish (from the word žẽmas 'low') was given to the territory in the central lowlands of present-day ethnographic Lithuania; it was also used later for the former Curonian lands that had been Lithuanianized, up to the Baltic Sea. The Curonian substratum had a particularly distinct influence on the formation of the current Samogitian (Zemaitish) dialect. In contrast to the Zemaitish, the Lithuanians who lived to the east were given the name Aukstaitish (from the word áukštas 'high'). The Lithuanian boundaries with both the West (Prussians and Yotvingians) and East Balts (Curonians, Semigallians, Selonians and Latgallians) were unstable. Some of those living in closer areas were Lithuanianized.

The West Baltic teritories were conquered by the Teutonic Knights in the 13th century. Lithuania, united under Mindaugas (1236-1263), stopped the German assault in the Baltic area; however, fierce battles continued between the Lithuanians and the Teutonic Order in this region for almost two hundred years. The union with Poland in 1386 was very important in breaking down the power of the Teutonic Knights. 1387 is considered the official date of adopting Christianity from Poland because, after King Mindaugas' death, Lithuanians had reverted to paganism.

Lithuanians had begun expanding to the East in the second half of the 12th century. A very large region of East Slavs, up to the Black Sea, was incorporated into the multinational Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The chancellory language of Lithuania was based on an Eastern Slavic language, which can be considered as the predecessor of Balatarusian.

After the Union of Lithuania and Poland in 1569, the Polish language became dominant in the Zeczpospolita (a common Polish-Lithuanian state). Russification in the 19th century was very strong in Lithuania, as Lithuanians were Roman Catholics. At the end of 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, the reformation and standardization of Lithuanian was established.

Lithuanian Background
Lithuanian tribes on the left bank of the Nẽmunas were under German rule for about 700 years. In the beginning the largest Lithuanian river, the Nẽmunas, separated them from other Lithuanians. After that, government boundaries and religion began to separate them. In the year 1525 the Order of the Knights of the Cross was disbanded; its last grand master Albrecht accepted Protestantism and created the secular Prussian duchy. An attempt was made to incorporate the Lithuanians living there into the state, and to separate them from both the religious and the cultural point of view from the other Lithuanians who lived in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and who had remained Catholics. The Lithuanians living in these two areas even called themselves by different names: those in Lithuania Minor (i.e., in the Lithuanian lands of Prussia) called themselves lietùvninkai, and those in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania called themselves lietùviai.

With the goal of consolidating Protestantism and extending its influence to neighboring countries, the government of the Grand Duchy of Prussia in the middle of the 16th century was very interested in the preparation and the publication of religious texts. The better educated and more talented pastors were empowered to prepare the most essential religious literature in the local languages. The work begun by the author of the first Lithuanian book, Martynas Mazvydas (Mosvidius), and his cousin Baltramiejus Vilentas, was continued at the end of the 16th century by Jonas Bretkunas. As a result of the quantity and quality of religious writings prepared by him, he became the most famous Lithuanian author in East Prussia. In addition to collections of hymns and sermons, he was the first to translate, in the course of 12 years, the entire Bible into Lithuanian.

The 17th century witnessed a continuation of this collective tradition of producing religious works in East Prussia, as well as linguistic works exemplified by the first Lithuanian grammar, published by Daniel Klein in 1653.

The 18th century was a time when Lithuanian culture and literature flourished in East Prussia. Here for the first time the pastor Mýkolas Mèrlinas began a linguistic program with other pastors on the kind of language to use with the common people. His followers began to gather and publish Lithuanian folklore and folk songs in their linguistic tracts, grammars and dictionaries. In the middle of the 18th century the first complete translation of the Bible into Lithuanian was published, new editions of hymns were prepared, even several grammars and dictionaries. The German poet Goethe was charmed by the beauty and the poetry of the Lithuanian folk songs published in linguistic works. The philosopher Immanuel Kant was persuaded to affirm the significance of the Lithuanian language and culture for East Prussia; he wrote the foreword to a Lithuanian grammar. When later, in the 19th century, the Lithuanian language became an object of unusual interest to Indo-Europeanists, they could rely partially on linguistic studies of the previous century. In East Prussia the first original belles-lettres work, The Seasons was written by Kristijõnas Doneláitis; this work belongs to the golden inheritance of world literature. When political conditions became unfavorable to Lithuanian culture in Lithuania Major, and when later they lost their statehood (1797), Prusssian Lithuanians published Lithuanian grammars and dictionaries, created belles-lettres, and investigated their language, folklore, and mythology.

Following an unsuccessful uprising against Tsarist Russia in 1863, Lithuanians were forbidden to use the Latin alphabet in their written documents. The Tsarist Russian government required that all Lithuanian publications be printed in the Cyrillic alphabet. Therefore during this complicated period books written with the Latin alphabet began to be published in East Prussia and delivered to Lithuania from there. The initiator and supporter of this work is thought to be the Samogitian bishop, Motiejus Valancius. Later activists of the Lithuanian revival used the path which he had prepared, organizing here the publication of the first Lithuanian newspapers. Almost two decades after the uprising, and with the advent of a new generation, plans for the restoration of the Lithuanian government began to be raised, but this time not on the basis of the Zeczpospolita (a common Polish-Lithuanian state), but on a national basis. However, on the basis of nationality, a significant portion of the cultural heritage, which in the course of several centuries had been created in the multinational Lithuanian grand duchy, was frequently rejected because it might have undergone foreign influence or was written in some language other than Lithuanian.

One of the most important signs of the national spring time in Eastern Europe was the revival of the native language and a promotion of its importance. Activists of the Lithuanian national revival in the first newspapers Ausra 'Dawn' (1883-1886) and Varpas 'Bell' also began to publish ideas about the revival of the Lithuanian language and the creation of a new standard language. In the language of the documents of that time there were many dialect forms and Polonisms. The most active segment of society was no longer satisfied with the tradition of the written language reaching back to the beginning of the 17th century, which reflected the epoch of a common Lithuanian and Polish state. The West Aukshtaitish dialect became the basis of the new standard language. This was close to the written language used in East Prussia. Having considerable influence on the choice of this dialect was the fact that this variant of the written language was the most thoroughly investigated and was described in the grammars by August Schleicher and Friedrich Kurschat.

Linguistic work to codify the norms of standard Lithuanian was initiated at the end of the 19th century and carried into the 20th by the linguists Kazìmieras Būgà and Jõnas Jablònskis, with their linguistic works and articles in the press, as well as by other Lithuanian cultural activists and writers who helped enrich the language. During this period, use was made not only of the living language, as by Jablònskis, but but also of developmental characteristics of the standard language, correct usage, and the specifics of different styles. An important contribution in this work was made by the Lithuanian Language Society and the journal Gimtóji kalbà 'Native Language'.

Immediately after World War I, a great misfortune befell Lithuanian linguistics. With the death of the outstanding Lithuanian linguist Kazìmieras Būgà, Lithuanian linguistic science collapsed. At the University of Kaunas there was no one to teach the linguistic disciplines, so Alfred Senn and Franz Brender were brought in from Switzerland. Not until 1930, when Prãnas Skar̃džius and Antãnas Salỹs had completed their studies in Germany and returned to Lithuania, was the the renaissance of Lithuanian linguistics to begin.

In 1923 Lithuania Minor was divided into two parts: the Klaĩpėda region fell to Lithuania, and East Prussia remained in German control. Lithuanians in the Klaĩpėda region always emphasized their language, cultural and religious differences from the rest of Lithuania, and did not call themselves Samogitians (žemaĩčiai) even though they were representatives of that dialect. Retaining the tradition of Lithuania Minor, they still used the Gothic script, especially in religious writings. They didn't want to hear anything about language reform and the replacement of traditional borrowings with Lithuanian words, processes that were taking place in the rest of Lithuania. For them, the greatest authorities in language were Frìdrichas Kuršáitis (F. Kurschat) and August Schleicher.

In the years before World War II, a great deal was accomplished in the Republic of Lithuania: terminology was created for various fields; separate language styles were established; orthography, vocabulary, accentuation, place names and family names were normalized; dialect data, data for a thesaurus-type dictionary, etc., were gathered. These activities later helped Lithuania hold out during the Soviet occupation and even in some instances to continue, for better or worse, work that had begun in earlier years, such as the publication of a large standard explanatory dictionary. Lithuania is now one of the states of the European Union.

Latvian Origins, Geographic Location, and Background
About the end of the first millenium A.D., the territory known today as Latvia was populated by four Baltic tribes: the Curonians in the west, the Semigallians in the south and the Selonians and Lettgallians in the central and eastern parts of the land. The Livs, a Finnish-Ugric tribe, lived on a stretch of land extending around the Bay of Riga and up into what today is southern Estonia.

Priests travelling with the Vikings from Scandinavia in the 9th and 10th centuries first introduced Christianity to the Baltic tribes populating the western and southern parts of present day Latvia. In the 10th and 11th centuries, Orthodox teachings, via Old Russian, were spread to the inhabitants living in the eastern and central parts. No written legacies of the languages spoken in this area during this period have been found, though archeologists speculate about the possibility that some type of runic writing system borrowed from the Scandinavians may have been used. Borrowed words in use today, which reflect this early Old Russian influence on the Latvian language, include for example baznīca 'church', grāmata 'book', svece 'candle', svēts 'holy', and zvans 'bell'.

The first written document in which Latvia is mentioned is in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia (Henrici Chronikon Lyvoniae), written in Latin by Henricus Lettus in 1225/26, with a supplement in 1227. The chronicle tells the story of how the Augustinian monk Meinhard, together with crusaders and tradesmen from Germany, sailed up the river Daugava in 1196 to begin the christianization of the pagan Baltic tribes. Henricus Lettus, as his name implies, used the Latinate names of "Lettigallia" and "Lethia," derived from the Lettgallian tribe, to designate the territory of present-day Latvia. This root is still found in the older designation for the Latvian language as "Lettish," and in the German name for Latvia as "Lettland."

After a century of warfare the pagan tribes lost their independence, and by the end of the 13th century they were completely subjugated to the German-led Livonian Order and the Catholic Church. Over the next few centuries, major differences in tribal language and culture gradually disappeared, and by the 16th century the Semigallian and Lettgallian languages had formed the basis for a more or less unified spoken Latvian language.

The Livs, who lived along the Daugava and Gauja rivers and spoke a Finno-Ugric language, were the first to be quelled by the colonizing Germans. Their name was taken over as the name for Livonia, the German dominated confederation which fell in the 16th century and which roughly corresponds to Latvia and Estonia of today. About a hundred Livian speakers have survived to the present, and in the 20th century they lived mainly in the Curonian fishing villages on the coast of the Baltic Sea between Kolka and Mazirbe. The influence of Livian is found especially in the Tamnieku dialect, one of the three major dialects of modern Latvian. The other two dialects are High Latvian, which is spoken in the east, and Central Latvian, spoken in the area between Tamnieku to the west and High Latvian to the east.

In the 16th century, German-speaking clergymen began to translate hymnals, agendas, liturgies, prayerbooks and fragments of the Bible into the Latvian language. The oldest preserved printed texts are the Catholic Catechism (tr. 1585) and the Lutheran Handbook (Catechism, pericopes and psalm book, tr. 1586/87).

Because the clergymen were not native speakers and because they were bound by rigid translation conventions -- which dictated word to word translation of Christian texts in order to rule out the possibility of sacrilege -- the resulting Early Written Latvian (EWL) was quite different from the natural spoken language. EWL is characterized by an overabundance of German grammatical forms and constructions. A striking example of German influence from this period is the introduction of the conjunction un 'and' into written Latvian, a loan from German und.

Georgius Mancelius (1593-1654), the former dean of Tartu University and court priest, introduced extensive corrections to the earlier forms of EWL in his many publications, and is generally regarded as having set the groundwork for modern Latvian literary language. A milestone in the standardization of written Latvian was the translation of the Bible (published 1685-1694), which promoted the use of the Central Latvian dialect as the basis for standard Latvian. This Bible translation also indirectly provided for the use of the Central Latvian dialect as the basis for colloquial Latvian by the Latvian people, as this was the one standard work that was distributed to the major parishes as part of their inventory.

Along with the ideas of the Enlightenment, a new direction toward secular Latvian literature was introduced by another German clergyman, Gothard Friedrich Stender (1714-1796). Interest in the presumed simple and natural life of the "native peoples" and their folklore was expressed by German philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803), who published eleven Latvian folk songs in German translation in his two volume book Alte Volkslieder (Old Folk Songs, 1778-1779).

After the end of the Swedish-Polish war in 1629, the eastern region of Latvia, today called Latgale, was for a few hundred years under different administrative jurisdiction than the rest of Latvia (first Polish/Lithuanian, then Russian). This, coupled with the fact that the majority of Latgalians were Catholics as opposed to the Lutherans living in central and western Latvia, led to the development of a distinct spoken language or dialect and a different writing tradition. The first book in Latgalian, Evangelia toto anno (The Evangelical Year), was published in 1753. A heavy blow to the region's intellectual development was the ban on the use of the Latin alphabet between 1861 and 1904. By the forced use of the Cyrillic alphabet, the Russian administration hoped to convert the Latgalians to the Orthodox belief and turn them away from Roman Catholicism. However, the attempts to separate Latgale from the rest of Latvia and to eradicate its writing tradition were not successful. Today Latgalian is the main language spoken in Latgale, and the region's cultural development is supported by the European Union.

Parallel to the written tradition dominated by the Baltic Germans, the Latvian peasantry kept up its oral tradition of telling tales and singing folk songs. The first ethnic Latvian authors (i.e. whose first language was Latvian) were published in the early 19th century, and the beginnings of Modern Standard Latvian were established with the advent of the National Awakening in the 1850s. In the late 1860s, leading Latvian intellectuals discussed the necessity of recording their nation's folklore before the oral tradition was lost. Krišjānis Barons (1835-1923), a mathematician and astronomer turned folklorist, succeeded in collecting and systematizing almost a quarter of a million dainas (short folk songs), which were published in eight volumes between 1900 and 1915.

By the time Latvia's independence was declared in 1918, a fully functional Modern Standard Latvian (MSL) had developed in both written and spoken form. During the first period of Latvian independence (1918-1939), Latvian was the country's primary language, and continual attention was given to questions concerning orthography, style and terminology, as well as documentation and research of dialects, folklore, etc.

During the Soviet occupation of Latvia (1945-1991), the Latvian language had a secondary position, but the passing of the Latvian Language Law of 1989 and the renewal of Latvian independence in 1991 gave Latvian the status of the official State Language of Latvia. Today, the National Language Commission and the State Language Agency continues work in promoting the status of Latvian in Latvia, and advanced research in Latvian is carried out at the many higher education institutes including the Latvian Language Institute at the University of Latvia.

Lesson 1: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
One of the most distinguished Lithuanian poets and playwrights of the second half of the 20th century, Justìnas Marcinkevičius has chosen as the basis of many of his works the most prominent cultural phenomena of the Lithuanian nation and, the most significant events of its history. The heroes of his dramas and poems are the first king of Lithuania, King Miñdaugas, the author of the first Lithuanian book, Martýnas Mãžvydas, the most famous writer, Kristijõnas Doneláitis, and the author of the first history of Lithuania, Sìmonas Daũkantas.

In his works, Justìnas Marcinkẽvičius gives meaning to the national culture (the birth of the state, writing, art and science) as a condition for the survival of the nation. Lithuanians do not have a heroic epic as do many other European nations. Thus the poems and plays of this writer have become a special national epic about the fundamental elements out of which Lithuania developed and from which Lithuania began.

Marcinkẽvičius is considered one of the most vivid stimulators of national consciousness and a supporter of passive resistance during the years of Soviet occupation. In his words, by using language, especially written, a nation enhances its existence and its self-consciousness.

Reading and Textual Analysis
In the selection given from Justínas Marcinkẽvičiuš book of essays, "The unity of the flowing river" (1994), there is a discussion of the first Lithuanian book, Martýnas Mãžvydaš catechism. This selection reflects the difficulty of the establishment of the Lithuanian language in its own country. In it the meaning of the book for all mankind is stressed. Marcinkẽvicius also points out some of the important characteristics of the preface of the first Lithuanian book -- its rhymed form and the use of personification. In his preface the readers are addressed with these words: "Brothers and sisters, take me and read (me) ..." In this statement it is possible to find several orthographic and phonetic features characteristic of the Old Lithuanian language, the lack of the marking of the long vowel y in the word sẽseris, the use of the Indo-European long a in place of the long o of the contemporary Lithuanian language (cf. brálei and bróliai), etc.

The language of the Old Lithuanian writings will be discussed at greater length in lessons 5-7.

"Brálei, sẽseris im̃kiet màni ir̃ skaitíkiet..."
 Collapse All
brálei -- noun, masculine; vocative plural of <brólis> brother -- brothers
sẽseris -- noun, feminine; vocative plural of <sesuõ> sister -- sisters
im̃kiet -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <im̃ti, ìma, ė̃mė> begin, start -- take
màni -- pronoun; accusative singular of <àš> I -- me
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
skaitíkiet -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <skaitýti, skaĩto, skaĩtė> read -- read (me)

Ìš didelė̃s méilės, viltiẽs ir̃ tikė́jimo kỹla tokiẽ žõdžiai, rẽtas Lietuvojè jų̃ nežìno, neskaĩtė ar̃ negirdė́jo.
 Collapse All
ìš -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
didelė̃s -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <dìdelis, dìdelė> great, large -- great
méilės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <méilė> love -- love
viltiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <viltìs> hope -- hope
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
tikė́jimo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <tikė́jimas> faith -- faith
kỹla -- verb; 3rd person present of <kìlti, kỹla, kìlo> arise -- arise
tokiẽ -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <tóks, tokià> such -- such
žõdžiai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <žõdis> word -- words
rẽtas -- adjective; nominative singular masculine, of <rẽtas, retà> rare -- rare (man)
Lietuvojè -- proper noun, feminine; locative singular of <Lietuvà> Lithuania -- in Lithuania
jų̃ -- pronoun; genitive plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- them
nežìno -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person present of <žinóti, žìno, žinójo> know -- does not know
neskaĩtė -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <skaitýti, skaĩto, skaĩtė> read -- has not read
ar̃ -- conjunction; <ar̃> if, or -- or
negirdė́jo -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <girdė́ti, gir̃di, girdė́jo> hear -- has not heard

Ìš tolimõs praeitiẽs ataĩdi jiẽ lìgi šių̃ dienų̃.
 Collapse All
ìš -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
tolimõs -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <tólimas, tolimà> distant -- distant
praeitiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <praeitìs> past -- the past
ataĩdi -- verb; 3rd person present of <ataidė́ti, ataĩdi, ataidė́jo> echo -- echo
jiẽ -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- they
lìgi -- preposition; <lìgi> until -- until
šių̃ -- pronoun; genitive plural feminine of <šìs, šì> this -- these
dienų̃ -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <dienà> day -- days

Užsižiẽbę istòrijos tamsojè, jiẽ nùšvietė erškėčiúotą lietùviško žõdžio kẽlią ir̃ lýg pìrmas naujãgimio klỹksmas prànešė pasáuliui, kàd gìmė rãštas, gìmė pirmóji lietùviška knygà.
 Collapse All
užsižiẽbę -- verb; nominative plural masculine of preterit participle active reflexive of <užsižiẽbti, užsižiẽbia, užsìžiebė> flash -- have flashed
istòrijos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <istòrija> history -- of history
tamsojè -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <tamsà> darkness -- in the darkness
jiẽ -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- they
nùšvietė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <nušviẽsti, nušviẽčia, nùšvietė> light -- have lighted
erškėčiúotą -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <erškėčiúotas, erškėčiúota> thorny -- thorny
lietùviško -- adjective; genitive singular masculine of <lietùviškas, lietùviška> Lithuanian -- of Lithuanian
žõdžio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <žõdis> word -- the word
kẽlią -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <kė̃lias> path -- the path
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
lýg -- conjunction; <lýg> as, like -- like
pìrmas -- number; nominative singular masculine of <pìrmas, pirmà> first -- the first
naujãgimio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <naujãgimis> new-born -- of the new-born
klỹksmas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <klỹksmas> cry, scream -- cry
prànešė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <pranèšti, pràneša, prànešė> announce, inform -- have announced
pasáuliui -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <pasáulis> world -- to the world
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
gìmė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <gìmti, gìmsta, gìmė> be born -- has been born
rãštas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <rãštas> writing -- writing
gìmė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <gìmti, gìmsta, gìmė> be born -- has been born
pirmóji -- definite number; nominative singular feminine of <pìrmas, pirmà> first -- the first
lietùviška -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <lietùviškas, lietùviška> Lithuanian -- Lithuanian
knygà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <knygà> book -- book

Taĩ įvỹko, kaĩp atspáusta titulìniame jõs pùslapyje, tū́kstantis penkì šimtaĩ kẽturiasdešimt septintų̃ mẽtų saũsio aštuñtą diẽną.
 Collapse All
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
įvỹko -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <įṽykti, įvỹksta, įvỹko> happen -- happened
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- as
atspáusta -- verb; neuter of preterit participle passive of <atspáusti, atspáudžia, atspáudė> print -- printed
titulìniame -- adjective; locative singular masculine of <titulìnis, titulìnė> title -- title
jõs -- pronoun; pronoun <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- its
pùslapyje -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <pùslapis> page -- on the page
tū́kstantis -- number; nominative singular of <tū́kstantis> thousand -- one thousand
penkì -- number; nominative masculine of <penkì, peñkios> five -- five
šimtaĩ -- number; nominative plural of <šim̃tas> hundred -- hundred
kẽturiasdešimt -- number; <kẽturiasdešimt> forty -- forty
septintų̃ -- number; genitive plural masculine of <septiñtas, septintà> seventh -- seven
mẽtų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <mẽtai> year -- in the year
saũsio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <saũsis> January -- of January
aštuñtą -- number; accusative singular feminine of <aštuñtas, aštuntà> eighth -- on the eighth
diẽną -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <dienà> day -- ...

Knỹgos atėjìmą pàs žmónes galė́tumėm prilýginti Prometė́jo žỹgdarbiui - diẽviškosios ugniẽs pagrobìmui, jõs išdalìjimui žmonė́ms.
 Collapse All
knỹgos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <knygà> book -- of a book
atėjìmą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <atėjìmas> arrival, coming -- the arrival
pàs -- preposition; <pàs> at, to -- among
žmónes -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <žmónės> people -- men
galė́tumėm -- verb; 1st person plural subjunctive of <galė́ti, gãli, galė́jo> can -- we could
prilýginti -- verb; infinitive of <prilýginti, prilýgina, prilýgino> compare -- compare with
Prometė́jo -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Prometė́jas> Prometheus -- of Prometheus
žỹgdarbiui -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <žỹgdarbis> deed, feat -- the deed
diẽviškosios -- definite adjective; genitive singular feminine of <diẽviškas, diẽviška> divine -- divine
ugniẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <ugnìs> fire -- of the fire
pagrobìmui -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <pagrobìmas> steal -- the stealing
jõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- (and) its
išdalìjimui -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <išdalìjimas> distribution -- distribution
žmonė́ms -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <žmónės> people -- to men

Sù knygà põ žẽmę ė̃mė sklìsti šviesà ir̃ šilumà, jì nè sỹkį gýnė žmõgų nuõ tamsõs ir̃ mẽlo žvėriũ, šìldė sugrùbusią jõ síelą, žãdino miñtį, skãtino veĩklai ir̃ kūrýbai.
 Collapse All
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- with
knygà -- noun, feminine; instrumental singular of <knygà> book -- a book
põ -- preposition; <põ> after, over, on -- over
žẽmę -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <žẽmė> earth -- the earth
ė̃mė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <im̃ti, ìma, ė̃mė> begin, start -- began
sklìsti -- verb; infinitive of <sklìsti, skliñda, sklìdo> spread -- to spread
šviesà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <šviesà> light -- light
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
šilumà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular <šilumà> warmth -- warmth
jì -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
sỹkį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <sỹkis> once -- once
gýnė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <gìnti, gìna, gýnė> defend -- defended
žmõgų -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- man
nuõ -- preposition; <nuõ> from -- from
tamsõs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <tamsà> darkness -- of darkness
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
mẽlo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <mẽlas> falsehood -- of falsehood
žvėriũ -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <žvėrìs> beast -- the beasts
šìldė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <šìldyti, šìldo, šìldė> warm -- it warmed
sugrùbusią -- verb; accusative singular feminine of preterit participle active of <sugrùbti, sugrum̃ba, sugrùbo> numb -- benumbed
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- his
síelą -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <síela> soul -- soul
žãdino -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <žãdinti, žãdina, žãdino> awake -- awakened
miñtį -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <mintìs> thought -- thought
skãtino -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <skãtinti, skãtina, skãtino> encourage, induce -- encouraged
veĩklai -- noun, feminine; dative singular of <veiklà> activity -- activity
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
kūrýbai -- noun, feminine; dative singular of <kūrýba> creativity -- creativity

Taĩgi knygà prabỹla lietùviškai, ir̃ nè bèt kaĩp, õ eiliúotai.
 Collapse All
taĩgi -- conjunction; <taĩgi> thus -- thus
knygà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <knygà> book -- the book
prabỹla -- verb; 3rd person present of <prabìlti, prabỹla, prabìlo> speak -- speaks
lietùviškai -- adverb; <lietùviškai> Lithuanian -- (in) Lithuanian
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
bèt kaĩp -- adverb; <bèt kaĩp> anyhow -- any kind
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- but
eiliúotai -- adverb; <eiliúotai> rhyme -- rhymed

Jõs áutorius, supràsdamas momeñto iškilmingùmą, pačiõs knỹgos vardù įtaigiaĩ kreĩpiasi į̃ skaitýtojus, pranèšdamas jíems, jóg taĩ, kõ tėvaĩ ir̃ prótėviai neregė́jo,- dabar̃ štaĩ ateĩna.
 Collapse All
jõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- its
áutorius -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <áutorius> author -- author
supràsdamas -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <supràsti, suprañta, suprãto> understand -- understanding
momeñto -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <momeñtas> moment -- of the moment
iškilmingùmą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <iškilmingùmas> solemnity -- the solemnity
pačiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <pàts, patì> itself -- itself
knỹgos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <knygà> book -- of the book
vardù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <var̃das> name -- in the name
įtaigiaĩ -- adverb; <įtaigiaĩ> suggestively -- suggestively
kreĩpiasi -- verb; 3rd person present reflexive of <kreĩptis, kreĩpiasi, kreĩpėsi> address -- addresses himself
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- to
skaitýtojus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <skaitýtojas> reader -- the readers
pranèšdamas -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <pranèšti, pràneša, prànešė> announce, inform -- announcing
jíems -- pronoun; dative plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- to them
jóg -- conjunction; <jóg> that -- that
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- all that
kõ -- pronoun; genitive of <kàs> which, what -- which
tėvaĩ -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <tėvaĩ> parent -- their fathers
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
prótėviai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <prótėvis> ancestor -- forefathers
neregė́jo -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <regė́ti, rẽgi, regė́jo> see -- had never seen
dabar̃ -- adverb; <dabar̃> now -- now
štaĩ -- particle; <štaĩ> here -- here
ateĩna -- verb; 3rd person present of <ateĩti, ateĩna, atė̃jo> come -- is at hand

Lesson Text
"Brálei, sẽseris im̃kiet màni ir̃ skaitíkiet..." Ìš didelė̃s méilės, viltiẽs ir̃ tikė́jimo kỹla tokiẽ žõdžiai, rẽtas Lietuvojè jų̃ nežìno, neskaĩtė ar̃ negirdė́jo. Ìš tolimõs praeitiẽs ataĩdi jiẽ lìgi šių̃ dienų̃. Užsižiẽbę istòrijos tamsojè, jiẽ nùšvietė erškėčiúotą lietùviško žõdžio kẽlią ir̃ lýg pìrmas naujãgimio klỹksmas prànešė pasáuliui, kàd gìmė rãštas, gìmė pirmóji lietùviška knygà. Taĩ įvỹko, kaĩp atspáusta titulìniame jõs pùslapyje, tū́kstantis penkì šimtaĩ kẽturiasdešimt septintų̃ mẽtų saũsio aštuñtą diẽną. Knỹgos atėjìmą pàs žmónes galė́tumėm prilýginti Prometė́jo žỹgdarbiui - diẽviškosios ugniẽs pagrobìmui, jõs išdalìjimui žmonė́ms. Sù knygà põ žẽmę ė̃mė sklìsti šviesà ir̃ šilumà, jì nè sỹkį gýnė žmõgų nuõ tamsõs ir̃ mẽlo žvėriũ, šìldė sugrùbusią jõ síelą, žãdino miñtį, skãtino veĩklai ir̃ kūrýbai. Taĩgi knygà prabỹla lietùviškai, ir̃ nè bèt kaĩp, õ eiliúotai. Jõs áutorius, supràsdamas momeñto iškilmingùmą, pačiõs knỹgos vardù įtaigiaĩ kreĩpiasi į̃ skaitýtojus, pranèšdamas jíems, jóg taĩ, kõ tėvaĩ ir̃ prótėviai neregė́jo,- dabar̃ štaĩ ateĩna.
Translation
"Brothers and sisters, take me and read (me) ..." Such words arise from great love, hope and faith and (it is) a rare Lithuanian (who) does not know, has not read or has not heard them. They echo from the distant past until today. Having flashed bright in the darkness of history, they have lighted the thorny path of Lithuanian literature (the word) and like the first cry of the new-born have announced to the world that writing has been born that the first Lithuanian book has been born. That happened, as printed on the title page on the eighth of January in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-seven.
We could compare the arrival of a book among men with the heroic deed of Prometheus, the stealing of the divine fire and its distribution to men. With a book light and warmth began to spread over the earth, not once (but many times) it defended man from the beasts of darkness and falsehood, it warmed his benumbed soul, awakened thought, encouraged activity and creativity.
Thus the book speaks Lithuanian, and not any kind, but rhymed. Its author, understanding the solemnity of the moment, in the name of the book itself, addresses himself suggestively to the readers announcing to them that all that which their fathers and forefathers had never seen, is now at hand.
Grammar
1 The Alphabet
The present-day Lithuanian alphabet took shape in the early 20th century. It developed from the Latin alphabet under the influence of the writing systems of such languages as Polish, German and Czech. The first Lithuanian alphabet was presented in the first printed Lithuanian book, the catechism by Martýnas Mãžvydas.

Today the Lithuanian alphabet consists of 32 letters: 20 consonants and 12 vowels --

 	 	a	 	ą	 	b	 	c	 	č	 	d	 	e	 	ę	 	ė	 	f	 	g	 	h	 	i	 	į	 	y	 	j
 	 	k	 	l	 	m	 	n	 	o	 	p	 	r	 	s	 	š	 	t	 	u	 	ų	 	ū	 	v	 	z	 	ž
Among the differences between the Lithuanian and English alphabets are 4 additional letters:

š = sh (as in 'push');
ž = zh (as in 'pleasure');
č = ch (as in 'check');
ė = eh (as in German 'Ehre').
Also, "nasal" letters ą, ę, į, ų are used. In the 16th and 17th centuries they represented long nasalized vowels. Now the diacritic below a letter denotes a long oral vowel, e.g., skų́sti 'to complain about', and may differentiate one grammatical form from another, e.g., accusative singular žõdį 'a word' vs. locative singular žõdy 'in the word'.

1.1 Vowels
The Lithuanian vowels are pronounced as they are in Latin. The letters į and y always denote a long vowel as in English 'be' and ų and ū as in English 'moon'. The letter a denotes a short vowel when stressed with the grave accent, or unstressed (as in English 'box'), but it is always long when under the circumflex accent, e.g., nãmas. It is similar to the English long vowel in 'calm'. ą always denotes a long vowel: acc.sg. diẽną 'day'. e denotes a long vowel when under the circumflex accent, e.g., sẽnas 'old' (as in English 'man'). It can also denote a short vowel (mostly in stressed final and unstressed syllable): loc.sg. kiemè 'in the yard', nom. sg. vedė́jas 'manager', nèšti 'to carry'. It is similar to the English short vowel in 'let'. In borrowings e is shorter and narrower, e.g., ètika 'ethics'. ę always denotes a long vowel: acc.sg. žẽmę 'earth'. ė always denotes a long vowel (close to English 'yeah'), e.g., gėlė̃ 'flower'. i and u denote short vowels (as in English 'sit' and 'book'): mìškas 'forest', bùtas 'apartment'. o denotes a long vowel (as in English 'bought'): nósis 'nose'. In some borrowings, however, it denotes a short vowel, e.g., tònas 'tone' (as in English 'brawny').

1.2 Consonants
The letter j corresponds to the English 'y' (as in 'yet'). The articulation of Lithuanian consonants differs from that of English consonants. Lithuanian consonants are pronounced with the speech organs relatively relaxed. No Lithuanian consonant is aspirated like English 'p', 't', 'k'. The Lithuanian r is rolled as in Spanish.

Consonants have two variants, one hard or unpalatalized and the other soft or palatalized, the only exception being j. Consonants are always soft before front vowels: rẽtas 'rare'. This feature is not marked in writing in any other way. Consonants that occur before back vowels may be hard or soft, e.g., rãtas 'wheel', siū́las 'thread'. The front vowel letter i before back vowels denotes palatalization; the letter does not stand for a separate sound, but marks palatalized consonants only, e.g., gen.pl. žvėrių̃ 'wild animals', žãlias 'green'. Palatalized t and d become č and dž when they occur before back vowels, cf. nom.pl. kãtės 'cats' and gen.pl. kačių̃ 'of cats', nom.sg. mẽdis 'tree' and gen.sg. mẽdžio 'of tree'.

Although the feature of palatalization occurs simultaneously with the pronunciation of the consonant, to the American ear the effect is that of a 'y' sound following the consonant. In the beginning of native Lithuanian words and in international words j is commonly pronounced, but not written, e.g., ieškóti 'to search', variántas 'variant' The letters f, ch, h occur only in recent loanwords.

1.3 Other Notes
Some sounds are represented by digraphs: ch (as in the Scottish pronunciation of 'loch'), dz (as in 'adz'), dž ('g' as in 'age').

In scholarly and teaching texts, diacritics indicate word stress and syllable intonation. There are three stress marks: the grave, as in à; the acute, as in é; and the circumflex, as in ĩ. The stress is not fixed in Lithuanian, and may fall on any syllable of the word. The stressed syllable can be short (with a short vowel) or long (with a long vowel or a diphthong).

The manner of pronouncing a long stressed syllable is called intonation. Two types of intonation can be distinguished: falling (acute) or rising (circumflex). Falling intonation is usually marked by the acute on a long vowel or by the grave on the first element of the diphthongs ùi, ìl, ìm, ìn, ìr, ùl, ùm, ùn, ùr, e.g., brólis 'brother', méilė 'love', výras 'man', pìrmas 'the first', kùmštis 'fist'.

Rising intonation is marked by the circumflex on a long vowel or on the second element of a diphthong, e.g., žõdis 'word', vỹnas 'wine', var̃das 'a name', šim̃tas 'hundred', saũsas 'dry'.

Short stressed syllables are always marked by the grave on the vowel, e.g., dìdelis 'big', pùsė 'half'. Intonation helps to distinguish words otherwise having the same sound structure, e.g., imper. šáuk, 'fire, shoot' and šaũk 'cry, shout', áušta 'it cools' and aũšta 'dawn is breaking'.

2 The Sound System
Sounds in Lithuanian may be divided into vowels and consonants. The sounds may be arranged in tables according to their articulation. Vowels can be classified as follows:

 	 	Short Front	 	Short Back	 	Long Front	 	Long Back
High	 	i	 	u	 	i	 	u
Middle	 	(e)	 	(o)	 	ė	 	o
Low	 	e	 	a	 	e	 	a
Vowels make up about one-third of all the sounds used in speech. Under similar circumstances, the long vowels are twice as long as the short ones and in stressed position they are articulated more clearly.

o and u are rounded vowels. In their production, the lips are spread somewhat sideways but not protruded, e.g., ùpė 'river', ožỹs 'goat'. Short mid vowels o, e occur in words of foreign origin: poètas'poet', òpera, 'opera'. In the diagram above they are given in parentheses because they are not equivalent to the corresponding long vowels o, ė. They are considered peripheral members of the Lithuanian vowel system.

The table below lists consonant sounds:

 	 	Voiceless	 	Voiced
Plosives	 	p	 	b
 	 	t	 	d
 	 	k	 	g
Sibilants	 	s	 	z
 	 	š	 	ž
 	 	ch	 	h
 	 	f	 	 
Sonorants	 	 	 	v
 	 	 	 	j
 	 	 	 	m
 	 	 	 	n
 	 	 	 	l
 	 	 	 	r
All the consonants except palatal j can be contrasted as being either palatalized or unpalatalized. As was already mentioned above, palatalization before back vowels is indicated by the letter i. If a consonant of a cluster is palatalized, the immediatelly preceding consonant will also be palatalized, e.g. ram̃stis 'prop', penkì 'five'.

The affricates c (t + s), dz (d + z), č (t + š), dž (d + ž) are composite sounds. They may also be either hard or soft: giñčas 'argument', čiùpti 'to snatch'.

Voiced consonants occurring in final position are devoiced, e.g., kàd 'that', daũg 'much, many'. English voiced consonants are not devoiced in word-final position. Lithuanian consonants may be subject to assimilation. The main rules of assimilation are:

a voiced consonant followed by a voiceless one becomes voiceless, e.g., darbštùs 'industrious', žiñgsnis 'step' (in these examples the b is pronounced like p, and the g like k),
a voiceless consonant followed by a voiced one becomes voiced, e.g., kasdiẽn 'every day', išbė́gti 'to run out' (in these examples the s is pronounced like z, and the š like ž).
Assimilation of consonants in Lithuanian differs from that in English. In Lithuanian geminate consonants are simplified to a single consonant, e.g., pùsseserė '(she) cousin', iššókti 'jump out'.

3 Noun Inflection
Nouns in Lithuanian are inflected to show their relations with other words and their function in the sentence. Endings play a very important role. They mark number, case and (usually) the gender of the noun.

For the most part a noun is masculine or feminine. For nouns denoting living beings natural gender is common, i. e., the gender of the noun is determined by the sex of the living being referred to: arklỹs 'horse' is masculine and kárvė 'cow' is feminine. The gender of nouns denoting inanimate things is usually indicated by case endings: masc. stógas 'roof', fem. žiemà 'winter'.

Contemporary Lithuanian has two numbers, singular and plural, which are indicated by endings. Some nouns in Lithuanian cannot change their number but are either singular (singularia tantum), e.g., medùs 'honey' or plural (pluralia tantum), e.g., vestùvės 'wedding'. In dialects and older writings the dual may appear (see Lesson 7).

There are seven cases in Lithuanian: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental, locative, vocative. The vocative is used to address a person or thing, e.g., voc.sg. bróli 'brother'. The locative singular and plural, the instrumental singular and plural, and the dative plural are frequently shortened. In addition, there are four other cases with a locative meaning encountered in dialects and old writings: inessive, illative, adessive, allative. These will be discussed later.

There are five declensions in Lithuanian. The nominative and genitive singular provide information on the declension to which a noun belongs:

Declension	 	Nominative	 	Genitive	 	Gender	 	Stem
1st	 	-(i)as	 	-(i)o	 	masc.	 	(i)a
 	 	-is	 	-io	 	masc.	 	ia
 	 	-ys	 	-io	 	masc.	 	ia
2nd	 	-(i)a	 	-(i)os	 	fem. (masc. possible)	 	(i)o
 	 	-ė	 	-ės	 	fem. (masc. possible)	 	ė
 	 	-i	 	-ios	 	fem.	 	io
3rd	 	-is	 	-ies	 	fem. (masc. possible)	 	i
4th	 	-(i)us	 	-(i)aus	 	masc.	 	(i)u
5th	 	-uo	 	-ens	 	masc.	 	n
 	 	-uo	 	-ers	 	fem.	 	r
 	 	-ė	 	-ers	 	fem.	 	r
3.1 The 1st Declension
The first declension is the most common declension of masculine nouns. This declension is further classified according to whether the final stem consonant is hard (unpalatalized) or soft (palatalized). Soft variants of the first declension have the nominative singular -ias, -is, -ys. The paradigms below are for the first declension nouns výras 'man' kẽlias 'road', brólis 'brother' and ožỹs 'goat'.

 	 	Hard	 	Soft	 	Soft	 	Soft
Nom sg	 	výras 'man'	 	kẽlias 'road'	 	brólis 'brother'	 	ožỹs 'goat'
Gen sg	 	výro	 	kẽlio	 	brólio	 	óžio
Dat sg	 	výrui	 	kẽliui	 	bróliui	 	óžiui
Acc sg	 	výrą	 	kẽlią	 	brólį	 	óžį
Inst sg	 	výru	 	keliú	 	bróliu	 	óžiu
Loc sg	 	výre	 	kelyjè	 	brólyje	 	ožyjè
 	 	 	 	kelỹ	 	bróly	 	ožỹ
Voc sg	 	výre	 	kelỹ	 	bróli	 	ožỹ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	výrai	 	keliaĩ	 	bróliai	 	ožiaĩ
Gen pl	 	výrų	 	kelių̃	 	brólių	 	ožių̃
Dat pl	 	výrams	 	keliáms	 	bróliams	 	ožiáms
 	 	výram	 	keliám	 	bróliam	 	ožiám
Acc pl	 	výrus	 	keliùs	 	brólius	 	óžius
Inst pl	 	výrais	 	keliaĩs	 	bróliais	 	ožiaĩs
Loc pl	 	výruose	 	keliuosè	 	bróliuose	 	ožiuosè
 	 	výruos	 	keliuõs	 	bróliuos	 	ožiuõs
Voc pl	 	výrai	 	keliaĩ	 	bróliai	 	ožiaĩ
3.2 The 2nd Declension
The great majority of feminine nouns belong to the second declension. A few nouns refer to male persons, e.g., dė̃dė 'uncle', Smetonà (surname). Only two nouns have the nom.sg. ending -i: martì 'daughter-in-law' and pati 'wife'. The following are paradigms for the second declension nouns síela 'soul', žinià 'news', bìtė 'bee' and martì 'daughter-in-law'.

 	 	Hard	 	Soft	 	Soft	 	Soft
Nom sg	 	síela 'soul'	 	žinià 'news'	 	bìtė 'bee'	 	martì 'daughter-in-law'
Gen sg	 	síelos	 	žiniõs	 	bìtės	 	marčiõs
Dat sg	 	síelai	 	žìniai	 	bìtei	 	mar̃čiai
Acc sg	 	síelą	 	žìnią	 	bìtę	 	mar̃čią
Inst sg	 	síela	 	žinià	 	bitè	 	marčià
Loc sg	 	síeloje	 	žiniojè	 	bìtėje	 	marčiojè
 	 	siéloj	 	žiniõj	 	bìtėj	 	marčiõj
Voc sg	 	síela	 	žìnia	 	bìte	 	martì
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	síelos	 	žìnios	 	bìtės	 	mar̃čios
Gen pl	 	síelų	 	žinių̃	 	bìčių	 	marčių̃
Dat pl	 	síeloms	 	žinióms	 	bìtėms	 	marčióms
 	 	síelom	 	žinióm	 	bìtėm	 	marčióm
Acc pl	 	síelas	 	žiniàs	 	bitès	 	marčiàs
Inst pl	 	síelomis	 	žiniomìs	 	bìtėmis	 	marčiomìs
 	 	síelom	 	žiniõm	 	bìtėm	 	marčiõm
Loc pl	 	síelose	 	žiniosè	 	bìtėse	 	marčiosè
Voc pl	 	síelos	 	žìnios	 	bìtės	 	mar̃čios
4 Verb Inflection
Verbs are inflected for person, number, tense, and mood. The first and second person endings show not only person, but also number, e.g., the 1st singular present klausaũ 'I listen'. The 3rd person singular and the 3rd person plural are the same in all tenses in Lithuanian.

Lithuanian has four simple (non-compound) verb tenses: present, simple past (preterit), frequentative past (frequentative preterit), and future. The frequentative past is rather recent; some Lithuanian dialects lack this tense. The Lithuanian tense system is rather simple compared with that of other Indo-European languages.

The aspect system, word formation, and compound tenses all compensate for this rather spare tense system. Compound tenses are formed with participles. In addition to the singular and plural, the dual number was still alive and used until the middle of the 20th century.

Lithuanian has four moods: indicative, subjunctive, imperative, and optative (permissive). Traditionally, the imperative mood includes the forms of the optative. Some grammars also give an indirect mood which is formed with participles of various tenses.

The infinitive, the 3rd person present, and the 3rd person preterit forms are the principal parts of the verb. They are listed in Lithuanian dictionaries. From their stems are derived all other verb forms. The infinitive ending is -ti; the shortened form -t is also common.

Lithuanian verbs are divided into 3 conjugations. The conjugation is determined by the endings of the third person, present tense: the 1st -(i)a (šóka 'dances'), the 2nd -i, (žiū̃ri 'looks'), the 3rd -o (sãko 'says').

4.1 The Present Tense
The present tense is formed from the present tense stem by adding the appropriate personal endings. There are no progressive forms in Lithuanian. The Lithuanian present tense can correspond to all the other English present tense forms: the simple present, the present continuous, the present perfect, and the present perfect continuous. The present tense forms are used independently of whether the action is regular, continuous, and whether it is taking place at the moment of speech, earlier, or later.

A good number of Lithuanian verbs have irregular conjugation. This is particularly characteristic of non-derived (two syllable) verbs of the first conjugation (-(i)a stem). They can have infixes, e.g., -n-, -v-, -st- or a lengthened root vowel, cf. gáuti 'to get', gauna 'gets', pū́ti 'to rot', pū̃va 'rots', pỹkti 'to be angry', pỹksta '(he) is angry', šìlti 'to get warm', šỹla 'gets warm'. In 3rd conjugation verbs (o stem) the suffixes -y- or -o- might be deleted: rašýti 'to write', rãšo 'writes', bijóti 'to fear', bìjo 'fears'; in 2nd conjugation (i stem) the suffix -ė-: sėdė́ti 'to sit', sė́di 'sits', etc. For this reason, it is always good to check the principal parts of the verb in the dictionary.

Plural forms can easily be formed by adding -me or -te respectively to the 3rd person form. The 1st and 2nd plural forms are trisyllabic and frequently shortened. Below those parts of the endings that may be dropped are given in parentheses.

 	 	'grow'	 	'wait'	 	'have'	 	'read'
1st sg	 	áugu	 	láukiu	 	turiù	 	skaitaũ
2nd sg	 	áugi	 	láuki	 	turì	 	skaitaĩ
3rd sg	 	áuga	 	láukia	 	tùri	 	skaĩto
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	áugam(e)	 	láukiam(e)	 	tùrim(e)	 	skaĩtom(e)
2nd pl	 	áugat(e)	 	láukiat(e)	 	tùrit(e)	 	skaĩtot(e)
3rd pl	 	áuga	 	láukia	 	tùri	 	skaĩto
4.2 The Past Tense
The simple preterit expresses an event which took place in the past. The event may be still in progress or completed. The past tense chiefly refers only to one occasion. The past event may or may not be connected with present moment of speaking.

The 3rd person ending of the simple preterit has either the ending -o or - ė, by which two conjugations are distinguished:

-au, -ai, -ome, -ote.
-iau, -ei, -ė, -ėme, -ėte.
The relationship of the preterit tense stems with the present and the infinitive stems is rather complicated. Many verbs have an irregular preterit. The past tense stem is formed by dropping the infinitive ending -ti; if a -y- precedes the -t- then -yti is dropped, e.g., ver̃kti 'to cry', ver̃kė 'cried', rašýti 'to write', rãšė 'wrote'. First conjugation verbs with an infinitive stem in -uo- or -au- replace final -uo- or -au- with -av-, e.g., dainúoti 'to sing', dainãvo 'sang', keliauti 'to travel', keliãvo 'traveled'. Second and third conjugation verbs with infinitive stems in -ė- or -o- drop the -ti and insert -j- between the stem and the ending, e.g., mylė́ti 'to love' mylė́jo 'loved', žinóti 'to know', žinójo 'knew'. One cannot always predict from the infinitive or present tense what the past tense conjugation will be.

 	 	'grew'	 	'waited'	 	'had'	 	'read'
1st sg	 	áugau	 	láukiau	 	turė́jau	 	skaičiaũ
2nd sg	 	áugai	 	láukei	 	turė́jai	 	skaiteĩ
3rd sg	 	áugo	 	láukė	 	turėjo	 	skaĩtė
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	áugom(e)	 	láukėm(e)	 	turė́jom(e)	 	skaĩtėm(e)
2nd pl	 	áugot(e)	 	láukėt(e)	 	turė́jot(e)	 	skaĩtėt(e)
3rd pl	 	áugo	 	láukė	 	turėjo	 	skaĩtė
5 Word Order
Word order in Lithuanian is not rigidly determined. It may vary depending on the communicative value (Functional Sentence Perspective) of the constituents. In an unemphatic declarative sentence, constituents conveying communicatively unimportant information (theme) generally precede those conveying communicatively important information (rheme). Grammatical relations between the constituents are indicated morphologically. All of the following word orders are possible:

Dū́mai gráužė akìs 'Smoke was making the eyes smart';
Gráužė dū́mai akìs;
Akìs dū́mai gráužė, etc.
In emphatic sentences the order is reversed, e.g., Ìš didelė̃s méilės kỹla tokiẽ žõdžiai 'Such words arise from great love'. Word order in interrogative sentences is usually the same as in declarative sentences: Ar̃ dū́mai gráužė akìs? 'Was smoke making the eyes smart?'

There are no articles in Lithuanian. Definiteness and indefiniteness may be expressed by word order and various pronouns and quantifiers. Nouns occurring in the initial position are usually considered to be definite, and nouns occurring in final position, indefinite: Brólis per̃ka mašìną 'The brother is buying a car'; Mašìną per̃ka brólis 'The car is being bought by a brother'.

In unemphatic speech, attributes precede their headnouns, e.g., dìdelė méilė 'great love', Prometė́jo žỹgdarbis 'deed of Prometheus' (lit. Prometheus' deed).

Lithuanian word order has become much more strict in the course of the last century. This can be connected with the process of the formation of the standard language at the end of the 19th century and the influence of other Indo-European languages. This rigidity of word order is particularly evident in attributive phrases. In the written language of the 16-19th centuries, the position of the defining genitive was not fixed and it was possible to say either Diẽvo tarnaĩ or tarnaĩ Diẽvo 'God's servants'.

Lesson 2: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
In the summer of 1941 Nazi Germany occupied Lithuania, but the Nazis were unable to form Lithuanian legions for their army. In revenge, in March of 1943 they arrested a group of Lithuanian intellectuals and sent them to the Stuthoff concentration camp. Among these was Balys Sruoga, a writer, specialist in literature, and a professor at Vytautas the Great and Vilnius universities. He considered totalitarianism the greatest enemy of mankind. In Stutthof it fell to his lot to experience the horror of the Nazi system of violence, and several times he narrowly escaped death. But still another tragedy awaited him on his return to Lithuania in 1945. His wife, an historian, and his daughter, fleeing from Soviet occupation, had gone west as had thousands of other Lithuanian scholars, artists and writers. The cruelties of Soviet occupation, the trains with Lithuanians exiled to Siberia had forced Sruoga to send them a warning: "Don't return home." He never saw them again.

After the war, Sruoga wrote in a few months a book about the Stutthof concentration camp called Dievų̃ mìškas 'Forest of the gods'. This is one of the first memoirs in Europe about the Nazi concentration camps. In it the process of dehumanization, which the totalitarian systems perpetrated, is exposed from within. Unlike many other works of this genre, here an attempt is made to conceal fragile human nature under external irony, laughter through tears, a screen for what cannot be completely told. But the book was received with hostility by the Soviet system because of its subtle irony, which did not allow a note of sentimentality to thrust its way through in the presence of the brutality and meaninglessness of death. The book was not published until about a decade later, when Europe had more or less had its fill of this kind of memoir. It is entitled "Forest of the Gods," after the name of the swampy place in which the Stutthof concentration camp had been built. Sruoga's health never recovered after Stutthof, and he died in 1947.

Reading and Textual Analysis
In the selection given below, the repressed voice of the humanist Sruoga (a voice which frequently recurs in this book) breaks through when he sees the Stutthof camp's "team of klipatas." Sruoga had invented the new word klìpata to denote the lame and crippled people who could hardly move, the physically injured and morally broken prisoners, out of whom the desire to live had been beaten and who no longer wished to resist death. His 'team' does not resemble living people, but a moving crowd of ghosts. The Nazis didn't kill the Stutthof prisoners immediately, but turned them into floundering shadows, klìpatas.

Here, Nazism is treated as contempt for the human being and a rejection of the ethical and cultural norms of millennia of human history. The writer depicts the forced death as an act of degradation of the world, rejecting all of the values which had existed until the present time. It is not the horror of death that is accentuated, but rather its senselessness, its outrageous, disfigured, befouled image. It is beyond the realm of natural relationships and natural feelings. It is unimaginable to measure it with the emotions of pity and sympathy. This death does not even evoke protest, because it is unclear to whom to protest.

In this selection we encounter a few phraseologisms: dū́mą nurýti 'to smoke', maũškę išmèsti 'to take a strong drink', nustóti prõto 'to go mad'. The book was translated into English by Balys Sruoga's granddaughter Aušrìnė (Aush) Bylà in 1996 (Vilnius: Vaga). A few changes have been made in the selected part of this translation in order to adapt it better for English speakers.

Mìršta žmónės kãro laukuosè baisiosè kančiosè.
 Collapse All
mìršta -- verb; 3rd person present of <mir̃ti, mìršta, mìrė> die -- die
žmónės -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <žmónės> people -- people
kãro -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kãras> war -- of the war
laukuosè -- noun, masculine; locative plural of <laũkas> field -- on the fields
baisiosè -- adjective; locative plural feminine of <baisùs, baisì> terrible, horrible -- horrible
kančiosè -- noun, feminine; locative plural of <kančià> agony, suffering -- in agony

Bèt tenaĩ - visì lýgūs.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
tenaĩ -- adverb; <tenaĩ> there -- there
visì -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <vìsas, visà> all -- all
lýgūs -- adjective; nominative plural masculine of <lýgus, lýgi> equal -- (are) equal

Teñ tàvo mirtìs ir̃ kañčios šiokiõs tokiõs prasmė̃s tùri: dė̃l kuriõs nórs idė́jos kariáujama, dė̃l tėvỹnės, dė̃l láisvės...
 Collapse All
teñ -- adverb; <teñ> there, thither -- there
tàvo -- pronoun; genitive singular of <tù> you -- your
mirtìs -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <mirtìs> death -- death
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
kañčios -- noun, feminine; nominative plural of <kančià> agony, suffering -- sufferings
šiokiõs tokiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <šióks tóks, šiokià tokià> some, a little -- some kind
prasmė̃s -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <prasmė̃> sense, meaning -- of meaning
tùri -- verb; 3rd person present of <turė́ti, tùri, turė́jo> have -- have
dė̃l -- preposition; <dė̃l> because, for -- for
kuriõs nórs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <kurìs nórs, kurì nórs> any, some -- any
idė́jos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <idė́ja> idea -- an idea
kariáujama -- verb; neuter of present participle passive of <kariáuti, kariája, kariãvo> fight -- (somebody is)fighting
dė̃l -- preposition; <dė̃l> because, for -- for
tėvỹnės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <tėvỹnė> homeland -- a homeland
dė̃l -- preposition; <dė̃l> because, for -- for
láisvės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <láisvė> freedom -- a freedom

Õ čià - niẽkur niẽko! Jokiõs prasmė̃s!
 Collapse All
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- but
čià -- adverb; <čià> here -- here
niẽkur -- adverb; <niẽkur> anywhere -- anywhere
niẽko -- pronoun; genitive singular of <niẽkas> no one, nobody, nothing -- nothing
jokiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <jóks, jokià> no, none -- no
prasmė̃s -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <prasmė̃> sense, meaning -- meaning

Niẽkas táu jokiõs pagálbos neteĩks.
 Collapse All
niẽkas -- pronoun; nominative singular of <niẽkas> no one, nobody, nothing -- no one
táu -- pronoun; dative singular of <tù> you -- to you
jokiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <jóks, jokià> no, none -- any
pagálbos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <pagálba> aid, help -- aid
neteĩks -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person future of <teĩkti, teĩkia, teĩkė> give, render -- will not give

Niẽkas tavę̃s neatjaũs, nepaguõs, į̃ mirtiẽs pãslaptį pakeleivìngos méilės žodžiù nepalydė̃s.
 Collapse All
niẽkas -- pronoun; nominative singular of <niẽkas> no one, nobody, nothing -- no one
tavę̃s -- pronoun; genitive singular of <tù> you -- you
neatjaũs -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person future of <atjaũsti, atjaũčia, àtjautė> sympathize, comfort -- will not comfort
nepaguõs -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person future of <pagúosti, pagúodžia, pagúodė> console -- will not console
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- to
mirtiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <mirtìs> death -- of death
pãslaptį -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <paslaptìs> mystery -- the mystery
pakeleivìngos -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <pakeleivìngas, pakeleivìnga> fellow traveller -- parting
méilės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <méilė> love -- of love
žodžiù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <žõdis> word -- with a word
nepalydė̃s -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person future of <palydė́ti, palỹdi, palydė́jo> accompany -- will not accompany

Seniaũ, beñt kituosè kraštuosè, kariamájam beñt paskutìnį nórą paténkindavo - dúodavo paválgyti, dū́mą nurýti, láišką parašýti, kókią maũškę išmèsti...
 Collapse All
seniaũ -- adverb; comparative of <seniaĩ> early, long ago -- in earlier times
beñt -- particle; <beñt> at least -- at least
kituosè -- pronoun; locative plural masculine of <kìtas, kità> other -- other
kraštuosè -- noun, masculine; locative plural of <krãštas> country -- in countries
kariamájam -- verb /; dat.sg.masc. of pres.ptc.pass.def. of <kárti, kãria, kórė> hang -- to a hanging one
beñt -- particle; <beñt> at least -- at least
paskutìnį -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <paskutìnis, paskutìnė> last, final -- final
nórą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <nóras> wish -- a wish
paténkindavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <paténkinti, paténkina, paténkino> meet, satisfy, grant -- used to grant
dúodavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <dúoti, dúoda, dãvė> give -- used to give (him)
paválgyti -- verb; infinitive of <paválgyti, paválgo, paválgė> eat -- to eat
dū́mą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <dū́mas> smoke -- a smoke
nurýti -- verb; infinitive of <nurýti, nurỹja, nurìjo> swallow -- to swallow
láišką -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <láiškas> letter -- a letter
parašýti -- verb; infinitive of <parašýti, parãšo, parãšė> write -- to write
kókią -- pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <kóks, kokià> any, some -- any
maũškę -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <maũškė> beret -- shot (of liquor)
išmèsti -- verb; infinitive of <išmèsti, ìšmeta, ìšmetė> down -- to down

Õ čià - pàspiria kója - ir̃ vìskas.
 Collapse All
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- but
čià -- adverb; <čià> here -- here
pàspiria -- verb; 3rd person present of <paspìrti, pàspiria, paspýrė> kick -- (they) kick
kója -- noun, feminine; instrumental singular of <kója> foot -- with foot
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
vìskas -- pronoun; nominative of <vìskas> everything -- that's all

Baĩsūs bùvo kitì naikìnimo lãgeriai, kur̃, bū́davo, àtveža kãlinį ir̃ tuojaũ nužùdo.
 Collapse All
baĩsūs -- adjective; nominative plural masculine of <baisùs, baisì> terrible, horrible -- atrocious
bùvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- were
kitì -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <kìtas, kità> other -- other
naikìnimo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <naikìnimas> extermination, destruction -- extermination
lãgeriai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <lãgeris> camp -- the camps
kur̃ -- adverb; <kur̃> where -- where
bū́davo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- used to
àtveža -- verb; 3rd person present of <atvèžti, àtveža, àtvežė> bring -- bring in
kãlinį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <kalinỹs> prisoner -- a prisoner
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
tuojaũ -- adverb; <tuojaũ> at once, immediately -- immediately
nužùdo -- verb; 3rd person present of <nužudýti, nužùdo, nužùdė> kill -- kill (him)

Bèt tàs pàts žùdymas faktinaĩ vỹko ir̃ Dievų̃ mìško padángėj.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- however
tàs pàts -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tàs pàts, tà patì> the same -- this same
žùdymas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <žùdymas> killing -- killing
faktinaĩ -- adverb; <faktinaĩ> in fact, practically -- in fact
vỹko -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <vỹkti, vỹksta, vỹko> take place -- took place
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- also
Dievų̃ -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <diẽvas> god -- of the Gods
mìško -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <mìškas> forest -- of the forest
padángėj -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <padángė> sky -- under the skies

Skìrtumas bùvo tiktaĩ tasaĩ, kàd čià žmõgų nukankìndavo, čiulptè iščiul̃pdavo jõ sveikãtą, jõ jėgàs, ver̃sdavo jį̃ mir̃ti ìš bãdo...
 Collapse All
skìrtumas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <skìrtumas> difference -- difference
bùvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- was
tiktaĩ -- particle; <tiktaĩ> only -- the only
tasaĩ -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine definite of <tàs, tà> this, that -- ...
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
čià -- adverb; <čià> here -- here
žmõgų -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- a person
nukankìndavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <nukankìnti, nukankìna, nukankìno> torture -- (they) used to torture
čiulptè -- second infinitive; <čiul̃pti, čiul̃pia, čiul̃pė> sucking -- ...
iščiul̃pdavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative <iščiul̃pti, iščiul̃pia, ìščiulpė> suck -- used to suck
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- his
sveikãtą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <sveikatà> health -- health
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- his
jėgàs -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <jėgà> energy -- energy
ver̃sdavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <ver̃sti, ver̃čia, ver̃tė> force, compel -- used to force
jį̃ -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
mir̃ti -- verb; infinitive of <mir̃ti, mìršta, mìrė> die -- to die
ìš -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
bãdo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <bãdas> starvation -- starvation

Kurì lãgerių rūšìs geriaũ atitiñka mū́sų ámžiaus kultū̃ros laimė́jimus, dievàž neleñgva bū́tų nusprę́sti.
 Collapse All
kurì -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- which
lãgerių -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <lãgeris> camp -- of camps
rūšìs -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <rūšìs> type -- type
geriaũ -- adverb; comparative of <geraĩ> better -- better
atitiñka -- verb; 3rd person present of <atitìkti, atitiñka, atitìko> correspond -- complements
mū́sų -- pronoun; genitive plural of <mẽs> our -- our
ámžiaus -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <ámžius> century -- century's
kultū̃ros -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <kultūrà> culture -- of culture
laimė́jimus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <laimė́jimas> achievement, winning -- the achievements
dievàž -- interjection; <dievàž> god knows -- God knows
neleñgva -- negative particle; <ne> not + adjective; neuter of <leñgvas, lengvà> easy -- (it is) not easy
bū́tų -- verb; 3rd person subjunctive of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- would be
nusprę́sti -- verb; infinitive of <nusprę́sti, nuspréndžia, nuspréndė> decide -- to decide

Pagaliaũ, - taĩ individualaũs skõnio reĩkalas...
 Collapse All
pagaliaũ -- conjunction; <pagaliaũ> after all, at last -- after all
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- it (is)
individualaũs -- adjective; genitive singular masculine of <individualùs, individualì> individual -- individual
skõnio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <skõnis> taste -- of taste
reĩkalas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <reĩkalas> matter -- a matter

Naujõkas, pìrmą kar̃tą sàvo gyvẽnime išvýdęs klìpatų komándą, lýg prõto nustója.
 Collapse All
naujõkas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <naujõkas> newcomer -- a newcomer
pìrmą -- number; accusative singular masculine of <pìrmas, pirmà> first -- first
kar̃tą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <kar̃tas> time -- for the ... time
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- his
gyvẽnime -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <gyvẽnimas> life -- in ... life
išvýdęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <išvýsti, išvýsta, išvýdo> see, witness -- witnessing
klìpatų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <klìpata> cripple -- of cripples
komándą -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <kománda> detachment, brigade -- the detachment
lýg -- conjunction; <lýg> as, like -- (it is) as if
prõto -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <prõtas> mind -- (his) mind
nustója -- verb; 3rd person present of <nustóti, nustója, nustójo> lose -- he is losing

Nè mirtiẽs jám baisù, - baisù šìto išniẽkinto žmogaũs vaĩzdo.
 Collapse All
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
mirtiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <mirtìs> death -- death
jám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- for him
baisù -- adjective; neuter of <baisùs, baisì> terrible, horrible -- (is) horrible
baisù -- adjective; neuter of <baisùs, baisì> terrible, horrible -- (is) horrible
šìto -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <šìtas, šità> this -- this
išniẽkinto -- verb; genitive singular masculine of preterit participle passive of <išniẽkinti, išniẽkina, išniẽkino> desecrate -- desecrated
žmogaũs -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- of man
vaĩzdo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <vaĩzdas> sight, image -- sight

Ir̃ nè tíek žmogaũs, - baisù šito išniẽkinto, subjauróto, sùdergto mirtiẽs vaĩzdo!
 Collapse All
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- even
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
tíek -- adverb; <tíek> so much, so many -- so much
žmogaũs -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- (the image) of the man
baisù -- adjective; neuter of <baisùs, baisì> terrible, horrible -- (is) horrible
šito -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <šìtas, šità> this -- this
išniẽkinto -- verb; genitive singular masculine of preterit participle passive of <išniẽkinti, išniẽkina, išniẽkino> desecrate -- desecrated
subjauróto -- verb; genitive singular masculine of preterit participle passive of <subjauróti, subjaurója, subjaurójo> disfigure, defile -- disfigured
sùdergto -- verb; genitive singular masculine of preterit participle passive of <suder̃gti, suder̃gia, sùdergė> befoul -- befouled
mirtiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <mirtìs> death -- of death
vaĩzdo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <vaĩzdas> sight, image -- image

Lesson Text
Mìršta žmónės kãro laukuosè baisiosè kančiosè. Bèt tenaĩ - visì lýgūs. Teñ tàvo mirtìs ir̃ kañčios šiokiõs tokiõs prasmė̃s tùri: dė̃l kuriõs nórs idė́jos kariáujama, dė̃l tėvỹnės, dė̃l láisvės... Õ čià - niẽkur niẽko! Jokiõs prasmė̃s! Niẽkas táu jokiõs pagálbos neteĩks. Niẽkas tavę̃s neatjaũs, nepaguõs, į̃ mirtiẽs pãslaptį pakeleivìngos méilės žodžiù nepalydė̃s. Seniaũ, beñt kituosè kraštuosè, kariamájam beñt paskutìnį nórą paténkindavo - dúodavo paválgyti, dū́mą nurýti, láišką parašýti, kókią maũškę išmèsti... Õ čià - pàspiria kója - ir̃ vìskas. Baĩsūs bùvo kitì naikìnimo lãgeriai, kur̃, bū́davo, àtveža kãlinį ir̃ tuojaũ nužùdo. Bèt tàs pàts žùdymas faktinaĩ vỹko ir̃ Dievų̃ mìško padángėj. Skìrtumas bùvo tiktaĩ tasaĩ, kàd čià žmõgų nukankìndavo, čiulptè iščiul̃pdavo jõ sveikãtą, jõ jėgàs, ver̃sdavo jį̃ mir̃ti ìš bãdo... Kurì lãgerių rūšìs geriaũ atitiñka mū́sų ámžiaus kultū̃ros laimė́jimus, dievàž neleñgva bū́tų nusprę́sti. Pagaliaũ, - taĩ individualaũs skõnio reĩkalas... Naujõkas, pìrmą kar̃tą sàvo gyvẽnime išvýdęs klìpatų komándą, lýg prõto nustója. Nè mirtiẽs jám baisù, - baisù šìto išniẽkinto žmogaũs vaĩzdo. Ir̃ nè tíek žmogaũs, - baisù šito išniẽkinto, subjauróto, sùdergto mirtiẽs vaĩzdo!
Translation
People die on the battlefields in horrible agony. But there, everyone is equal. Your death and suffering have some kind of meaning: you're fighting for a purpose, for your homeland, for your freedom...
But here - nothing anywhere! No meaning! No one will give you any help. No one will comfort you, console you, accompany you to the mystery of death with a parting word of love.
In earlier times, in other countries, they granted a final wish to the one about to hang: they gave him (something) to eat, (a chance) to smoke, to write a letter, to down a shot of liquor... But here they give you a kick, and that's all.
The other extermination camps, where they brought in a prisoner and immediately killed (him), were atrocious, too. This same killing took place under the skies of the Forest of the Gods; the only difference was that here they tortured a person to death. His health, his energy were sucked dry, they made him die of starvation...
Which type of camp better complements the achievements of our century's culture? God knows! (It is) not easy to decide. After all, it's a matter of individual taste...
A newcomer witnessing the detachment of cripples for the first time in his life, it is as if he is losing his mind. Death is not horrible (for him) - this sight of a desecrated man is horrible. And not only (the image of the) man, but even the desecrated, disfigured, befouled image of death is horrible.
Grammar
6 Diphthongs
There are 6 pure diphthongs and 16 mixed diphthongs in Lithuanian. The pure diphthongs consist of two vowels and are the following: ai, au, ei, ie, ui, uo. Each of these can be stressed or unstressed. As with the long vowels, if stressed they can have either the circumflex intonation (marked by tilde) on the second vowel, or the acute intonation (marked by acute accent) on the first vowel. A diphthong with acute intonation will have a heavier stress on the initial element, e.g., láisvė 'freedom', méilė 'love', píeva 'meadow'. Thus, the initial element will be held longer than the second. Just the reverse is true for a diphthong with the circumflex intonation, e.g., laũkas 'field', vaĩzdas 'view, sight', paguõsti 'to console'.

There are two types of pure diphthongs: gliding diphthongs (ie, uo) and compound diphthongs (ai, au, ei, ui). In pronouncing the gliding diphthongs, we do not feel a phonetic boundary between the first and the second element. The Lithuanian ie has no counterpart in English, It may be thought of as similar to the vowel of 'beard'. When this diphthong occurs in initial position, there is a tendency to pronounce it as though there were a j in front of it: ieškóti 'to look for'. The diphthong uo also has no counterpart in English; it can perhaps be compared to the "uo" of Italian 'buono'.

Both elements of the compound diphthongs are clearly marked. ái is similar to the 'ai' of English 'aisle'; aĩ is somewhat similar to the English 'a' in 'able'. áu is somewhat similar to the 'ou' of American-English 'out'; aũ may be compared to the Canadian English 'ou' in 'out'. There is no such diphthong as éi in English. It can be roughly compared to the English 'ai' in 'sail'. eĩ is quite similar to the 'ei' in 'weight'. There is nothing like uĩ in English; ùi (which is relatively rare) sounds something like a very rapidly pronounced 'phooey'.

Diphthongs in which the vowels a, e, i, u are followed by l, m,n, r are known as mixed diphthongs. In the mixed diphthongs, as in the pure diphthongs, either the first or the second element may be stressed. If the second element is stressed, a tilde (~) will be written over the l, m, n or r, e.g., kar̃tas 'time', leñgvas 'easy, light'. The second circumflex element is half-long. If the first element is to be stressed, an acute acent is written over the letters a and e (the acute element is half-long), but a grave accent is used over the letters i and u (the acute element remains short), e.g., padángė 'the skies', kélti 'to lift', mìršta 'dies', pìlkas 'grey'. In international words, mixed diphthongs with short e and o are used: fèrma 'farm', bòmba 'bomb'.

The unstressed diphthongs sound like aĩ, aũ, eĩ, uĩ, etc., but the unstressed syllable has less amplitude than the stressed: vaidmuõ 'role', kartùs 'bitter'. Some other diphthongs (eu, oi, ou) occur only in international words, e.g., Európa 'Europe', kolòidas 'colloid'.

7 Noun Declensions
7.1 The 3rd Declension
Most nouns of the third declension are of the feminine gender, but a few such as dantìs 'tooth', vagìs, 'thief', žvėrìs 'beast', debesìs 'cloud' are masculine (they have -ui in the dative singular). All nouns of the third declension have the ending -is in the nominative singular. The genitive singular helps to distinguish third declension nouns from those first declension nouns with the nominative singular ending -is, cf: nom.sg. brólis, gen.sg. brólio 'brother' (1st declension) and nom.sg. širdìs, gen.sg. širdiẽs 'heart' (3rd declension).

In the genitive plural some nouns of this paradigm have the ending -ų, e.g., debesų̃ 'clouds' after a hard consonant, whereas others have the following ending after a palatalized consonant -iu, e.g., rūšių̃ 'kinds'. This can be explained historically: the former nouns are traced back to the 5th declension (consonantal stems), the latter to the 3rd declension (i-stem). There is a strong tendency for masculine nouns of the 3rd declension to shift to the 1st declension (ia-stem), cf:

nom.sg. debesìs and debesỹs 'cloud';
gen.sg. dantiẽs and dañčio 'tooth'; debesiẽs and dẽbesio 'cloud'; žvėriẽs and žvė́rio 'beast';
inst.sg. dantimì and dančiù 'tooth'; debesimì and dẽbesiu 'cloud'; žvėrimì and žvė́riu 'beast', etc.
Some nouns can be declined either according to 1st or the 3rd declension, e.g., deguõnis 'oxygen', grobuõnis 'plunderer', veliónis 'the deceased'.

In colloquial Lithuanian and the dialects, the feminine nouns may have two alternative forms in the instrumental singular: one of the 3rd declension (i-stem) and another of the 2nd declension (io-stem), e.g., širdimì and šìrdžia 'heart'; ugnimì and ugnià 'fire'; žuvimì and žuvià 'fish', etc.

móteris 'woman' and obelìs 'apple tree' have two alternative forms in the genitive singular: móters, obel̃s and moteriẽs, obeliẽs.

The forms of the 3rd declension are as follows:

 	 	Feminine	 	Masculine
Nom sg	 	žuvìs 'fish'	 	vagìs 'thief'
Gen sg	 	žuviẽs	 	vagiẽs
Dat sg	 	žùviai	 	vãgiui
Acc sg	 	žùvį	 	vãgį
Inst sg	 	žuvimì	 	vagimì
 	 	žuvim̃	 	vagim̃
Loc sg	 	žuvyjè	 	vagyjè
 	 	žuvỹ	 	vagỹ
Voc sg	 	žuviẽ	 	vagiẽ
 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	žùvys	 	vãgys
Gen pl	 	žuvų̃	 	vagių̃
Dat pl	 	žuvìms	 	vagìms
 	 	žuvìm	 	vagìm
Acc pl	 	žuvìs	 	vagìs
Inst pl	 	žuvimìs	 	vagimìs
 	 	žuvim̃	 	vagim̃
Loc pl	 	žuvysè	 	vagysè
Voc pl	 	žùvys	 	vãgys
7.2 The 4th Declension
All nouns ending in -us (hard stem) and -ius (soft stem) belong to the fourth declension. They are all masculine. Those nouns which have the soft stem (iu-stem) have the plural declension exactly like the first declension (ia-stem). The 4th declension nouns are not numerous. They may obtain inflectional forms of the 1st (ia-stem) declension, e.g:

nom.pl. sū́nūs and sūnaĩ 'sons'; tur̃gūs and tur̃gaĩ 'markets';
dat.pl. sūnùms and sūnáms 'sons'; tur̃gums and tur̃gams 'markets'.
On the other hand, 1st declension nouns ending in -jas have the endings of the 4th declension -au in vocative singular, e.g., dė́stytojau (nom.sg. dė́stytojas) 'lecturer', vė́jau (nom.sg. vė́jas) 'wind'; and locative singular, e.g., dė́stytojuje, vė́juje (vė́jyje is also used).

The noun žmogùs 'man', 'human being' is inflected in the singular according to the 4th declension; in the plural it is inflected according to the 2nd (ė-stem) declension (see bellow).

Below are paradigms for the 4th declension nouns sūnùs 'son', ámžius 'age' and žmogùs 'man':

 	 	Hard	 	Soft	 	Hard
Nom sg	 	sūnùs 'son'	 	ámžius 'age'	 	žmogùs 'man'
Gen sg	 	sūnaũs	 	ámžiaus	 	žmogaũs
Dat sg	 	sū́nui	 	ámžiui	 	žmõgui
Acc sg	 	sū́nų	 	ámžių	 	žmõgų
Inst sg	 	sūnumì	 	ámžiumi	 	žmogumì
 	 	sūnum̃	 	ámžium	 	žmogum̃
Loc sg	 	sūnujè	 	ámžiuje	 	žmogujè
 	 	sūnùj	 	ámžiuj	 	žmogùj
Voc sg	 	sūnaũ	 	ámžiau	 	žmogaũ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	Hard	 	Soft	 	Soft
Nom pl	 	sū́nūs	 	ámžiai	 	žmónės
Gen pl	 	sūnų̃	 	ámžių	 	žmonių̃
Dat pl	 	sūnùms	 	ámžiams	 	žmonė́ms
 	 	sūnùm	 	ámžiam	 	žmonė́m
Acc pl	 	sū́nus	 	ámžius	 	žmónes
Inst pl	 	sūnumìs	 	ámžiais	 	žmonėmìs
 	 	sūnum̃	 	 	 	žmonė̃m
Loc pl	 	sūnuosè	 	ámžiuose	 	žmonėsè
Voc pl	 	sū́nūs	 	ámžiai	 	žmónės
7.3 The 5th Declension
The number of nouns belonging to the 5th declension is not very large, and some are irregular. To this declension belong feminine nouns in -uo, -ė (gen.sg. -ers) and masculine nouns in -uo (gen.sg. -ens). They are a continuation of the ancient consonantal n, r and other stems. The consonantal stems have been retained only in the genitive singular. In all other cases, except the nominative singular, consonant stem nouns are now inflected like i-stem nouns. In certain cases some of these nouns have forms of the 1st declension.

In the instrumental singular the masculine nouns akmuõ 'stone', vanduõ 'water', piemuõ 'shepherd' have the endings of the 1st declension (ia-stem): ãkmeniu, vándeniu, píemeniu; the feminine nouns sesuõ 'sister' and duktė̃ 'daughter' have two alternative forms of instrumental singular: seserimì, dukterimì (i-stem) and sẽseria, dùkteria (io-stem).

The noun mė́nuo (its alternative form is mė́nesis) 'month' is declined according to the 1st declension.

šuõ 'dog' is irregular. In the nominative singular šuõ has an alternative form šuvà and in the genitive singular its alternatives are šuniẽs and šùnio.

The forms of the 5th declension are as folows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine
Nom sg	 	vanduõ 'water'	 	sesuõ 'sister'	 	duktė̃ 'daughter'	 	šuõ 'dog'
Gen sg	 	vandeñs	 	seser̃s	 	dukter̃s	 	šuñs
Dat sg	 	vándeniui	 	sẽseriai	 	dùkteriai	 	šùniui
Acc sg	 	vándenį	 	sẽserį	 	dùkterį	 	šùnį
Inst sg	 	vándeniu	 	seserimì	 	dukterimì	 	šunimì
 	 	 	 	seserim̃	 	dukterim̃	 	šunim̃
Loc sg	 	vandenyjè	 	seseryjè	 	dukteryjè	 	šunyjè
 	 	vandenỹ	 	seserỹ	 	dukterỹ	 	šunỹ
Voc sg	 	vandeniẽ	 	seseriẽ	 	dukteriẽ	 	šuniẽ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	vándenys	 	sẽserys	 	dùkterys	 	šùnys
Gen pl	 	vandenų̃	 	seserų̃	 	dukterų̃	 	šunų̃
Dat pl	 	vandenìms	 	seserìms	 	dukterìms	 	šunìms
 	 	vandenìm	 	seserìm	 	dukterìm	 	šunìm
Acc pl	 	vándenis	 	sẽseris	 	dùkteris	 	šunìs
Inst pl	 	vandenimìs	 	seserimìs	 	dukterimìs	 	šunimìs
 	 	vandenim̃	 	seserim̃	 	dukterim̃	 	šunim̃
Loc pl	 	vandenysè	 	seserysè	 	dukterysè	 	šunysè
Voc pl	 	vándenys	 	sẽserys	 	dùkterys	 	šùnys
8 Verb Tenses
8.1 The Frequentative Past Tense
In addition to the simple past tense (or preterit) discussed in Lesson 1 there is another past tense, the frequentative past, which denotes an action which took place several times, frequently, at repeated intervals in the past. It can be translated by such English expresions as: 'I used to...'; 'I kept...'; I 'would...'. To obtain the frequentative past tense forms, we must drop the infinitive ending -ti and add the suffix -dav- plus the preterit endings: -au, -ai, -o, -ome, -ote, -o.

The method of formation is the same for all three conjungations. The stress is always on the same syllable as in the infinitive.

A past habit can be expressed analytically by the use of the parenthetic form bū́davo 'used to be' and the present of the verb, e.g., Baĩsūs bùvo kitì naikìnimo lãgeriai, kur̃, bū́davo, àtveža kãlinį ir̃ tuojaũ nužùdo 'The other extermination camps, where they brought in a prisoner and immediately killed (him), were atrocious, too'. Repeated past events that occurred on a specific occasion cannot be expressed by the frequentative past tense, cf: Jìs žaĩsdavo dvì vãlandas 'He used to play two hours'. Vãkar jìs žaĩde dvì vãlandas 'Yesterday he played two hours'.

Here the frequentative past tense paradigms of three verbs áugti 'to grow', turė́ti 'to have' and skaitýti are given:

1st sg	 	áugdavau	 	turė́davau	 	skaitýdavau
2nd sg	 	áugdavai	 	turė́davai	 	skaitýdavai
3rd sg	 	áugdavo	 	turė́davo	 	skaitýdavo
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	áugdavom(e)	 	turė́davom(e)	 	skaitýdavom(e)
2nd pl	 	áugdavot(e)	 	turė́davot(e)	 	skaitýdavot(e)
3rd pl	 	áugdavo	 	turė́davo	 	skaitýdavo
8.2 The Future Tense
The future tense is formed by dropping the -ti from the infinitive and adding the future tense suffix -s(i)- plus endings: -siu, -si, -s, -sime, -site, -s.

The stress is always on the same syllable as in the infinitive. In the 3rd person an acute is replaced by a circumflex stress: turė́ti 'to have'; turė̃s '(he) will have'.

Some verbs with a monosyllabic stem shorten the root vowel in the 3rd person, e.g., inf. pū́ti 'to rot'; 3 fut. pùs '(it) will rot'; inf. lýti 'to rain'; 3 fut. lìs '(it) will rain'.

Certain consonantal constractions or simplifications are characteristic of the future tense: s + s = s; š + s = š; z + s = s; ž + s = š, e.g., mès-ti 'to throw' and mes + siu = mèsiu; 'I will throw'; nèš-ti 'to carry' and neš + siu = nèšiu 'I will carry'; zir̃z-ti 'to whine' and zirz + siu = zir̃siu; 'I will whine'; vèž-ti 'to transport' and vež + siu = vèšiu 'I will transport'.

The future tense denotes a concrete or generalized action in the future, e.g., Greĩt ateĩs žiemà 'Winter will come soon'. The form of the future tense may also denote willingness, determination, intention, likelihood, threat, etc: Àš jái niekadà neatléisiui 'I will never forgive her'.

The future tense paradigms for the verbs áugti 'to grow', rýti 'to swallow' and vèžti 'to transport' are given below:

1st sg	 	áugsiu 'I will grow'	 	rýsiu 'I will swallow'	 	vèšiu 'I will transport'
2nd sg	 	áugsi	 	rýsi	 	vèši
3rd sg	 	aũgs	 	rìs	 	vèš
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	áugsim(e)	 	rýsim(e)	 	vèšim(e)
2nd pl	 	áugsit(e)	 	rýsit(e)	 	vèšit(e)
3rd pl	 	aũgs	 	rìs	 	vèš
8.3 Conjungation of the Verb bū́ti 'to be'
The verb bū́ti 'to be' has different (suppletive) stems: es-, bu- / bū-. In the 3rd person present the unique stem yrà '(it) is, (they) are' is used.

Its paradigms for the present, preterit, frequentative and future tense are as follows:

 	 	Present	 	Preterit	 	Frequentative	 	Future
1st sg	 	esù '(I) am'	 	buvaũ '(I) was'	 	bū́davau '(I) used to be'	 	bū́siu '(I) will be'
2nd sg	 	esì	 	buvaĩ	 	bū́davai	 	bū́si
3rd sg	 	yrà	 	bùvo	 	bū́davo	 	bùs
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	ẽsam(e)	 	bùvom(e)	 	bū́davom(e)	 	bū́sim(e)
2nd pl	 	ẽsat(e)	 	buvot(e)	 	bū́davot(e)	 	bū́sit(e)
3rd pl	 	yrà	 	bùvo	 	bū́davo	 	bùs
Also, more recent forms created by adding the formants -n- or -v- exist, e.g., 1st sg. būnù, būvù 'I am', 3rd bū̃na, bū̃va '(it) is, (they) are', etc. These forms convey the meaning of a regular process. The athematic 3rd person form ẽsti '(it) is, (they) are' has this meaning also.

9 Pronouns
9.1 The Personal Pronouns
The use of the personal pronouns is similar to that of English. 1st and 2nd person pronouns do not substitute for nouns. They refer either to masculine or feminine nouns. Only 3rd person pronouns can refer to both persons and non-persons, e.g.,

jìs - žmogùs 'man'; laũkas 'field'.
jì - móteris 'woman'; paslaptìs 'mystery, secret'.
One must remember, however, that the 3rd person agrees with the word it refers to in number and gender.

1st and 2nd person forms are usually used without any pronoun:

Atsikė́liau ankstì 'I got up early'.
Išvỹkstame vidùrdienį 'We are leaving at noon'.
The case of the pronoun is determined by its use in the clause in which it occurs, e.g.,

Edìtą pasitìksiu aeroúoste 'I will meet Edita in the airport'.
Prãšom jái pérduoti màno linkė́jimus 'Please give her my regards'.
The pronoun jái 'her' is feminine singular because it refers to Edità. It is in the dative case because it is the second object of the verb pérduoti 'to give'. In the clause, personal pronouns may function as subjects, objects, predicatives, adverbial modifiers of place, e.g., Jìš sėdė́jo šalià manę̃s 'He was sitting next to me' (subject and adverbial modifier of place).

The 2nd singular pronoun tù 'thou' is the familiar form; it is used to address animals, children, close friends, members of the immediate family, and God. The polite form jū̃s is used whenever one addresses persons who are not members of the above-mentioned groups. This usage is practically identical with the use of 'du' and 'Sie' in German. Another respectful word támsta 'you' is considered old-fashioned. The forms pàts, patì 'oneself' are not as formal as jū̃s 'you', but are used only rarely.

The forms of the personal pronouns are as folows:

 	 	1st person	 	2nd person	 	3rd person Masculine	 	3rd person Feminine
Nom sg	 	àš 'I'	 	tù 'you (thou)'	 	jìs 'he'	 	jì 'she'
Gen sg	 	manę̃s	 	tavę̃s	 	jõ	 	jõs
 	 	màno	 	tàvo	 	 	 	 
Dat sg	 	mán	 	táu	 	jám	 	jái
Acc sg	 	manè	 	tavè	 	jį̃	 	ją̃
Inst sg	 	manimì	 	tavimì	 	juõ	 	jà
 	 	manim̃	 	tavim̃	 	 	 	 
Loc sg	 	manyjè	 	tavyjè	 	jamè	 	jojè
 	 	manỹ	 	tavỹ	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	mẽs 'we'	 	jū̃s 'you'	 	jiẽ 'they'	 	jõs 'they'
Gen pl	 	mū́sų	 	jū́sų	 	jų̃	 	jų̃
Dat pl	 	mùms	 	jùms	 	jíems	 	jóms
 	 	mùm	 	jùm	 	jíem	 	jóm
Acc pl	 	mùs	 	jùs	 	juõs	 	jàs
Inst pl	 	mumìs	 	jumìs	 	jaĩs	 	jomìs
Loc pl	 	mumysè	 	jumysè	 	juosè	 	josè
9.2 The Dual of the Pronouns
Special forms of the personal pronouns may be used in the dual:

1st masc. mùdu 'we two'
1st fem. mùdvi 'we two'
2nd masc. jùdu 'you two'
2nd fem. jùdvi 'you two'
3rd masc. juõdu (jiẽdu) 'they two'
3rd masc. jiẽdvi 'they two'
They have the same endings as dù (masc.), dvì (fem.) 'two'. There are some demonstrative dual forms (e.g., tuõdu, tiẽdvi 'those two'; šiuõdu, šiẽdvi 'these two', anuõdu, aniẽdvi 'those two') and interrogative dual pronouns (e.g., kuriuõdu, kuriẽdvi 'which two'), but they are used much more rarely.

The pronouns abù (abùdu), abì (abi\dvi) 'both' have only the dual meaning. As the dual number of other word classes has almost disappeard, dual pronominal forms are used with the plural forms of nouns, adjectives and verbs. However, in Modern Lithuanian the dual pronominal forms are usually replaced by plural forms.

9.3 The Possessive Pronouns
Possessive forms indicate that an object belongs to some person or persons. This meaning is usually expressed by the genitive form of the personal pronouns. The personal pronouns àš 'I', tù 'you' ('thou'), and the reflexive pronoun have separate possessive genitive singular forms màno 'my', tàvo 'your' and sàvo. They differ from the genitive singular manę̃s, tavę̃s, savęs used in other functions, cf: Kur̃ màno knygà? 'Where is my book?'; Paláuk manę̃s 'Wait for me'; Negavaũ tàvǫ láiško 'I did not receive your letter'; Nepažį́stu tavę̃s 'I do not know you'.

Possessive pronouns can function as attributes and predicatives:

Personal pronoun	 	Possessive Attributive	 	Possessive Predicative
àš 'I'	 	màno 'my'	 	màno 'mine'
tù 'you, thou'	 	tàvo 'your, thy'	 	tàvo 'yours'
jìs 'he'	 	jõ 'his'	 	jõ 'his'
jì 'she'	 	jõs 'her'	 	jõs 'hers'
mẽs 'we'	 	mū́sų 'our'	 	mū́sų 'ours'
jū̃s 'you'	 	jū́sų 'your'	 	jū́sų 'yours'
jiẽ 'they'	 	jų̃ 'their'	 	jų̃ 'theirs'
jõs 'they'	 	jų̃ 'their'	 	jų̃ 'theirs'
Examples:

Vãkar kalbė́jau sù tàvo draugè 'Yesterday I spoke with your (female) friend';
Šìtas dvìratis yrà tàvo 'This bicycle is yours'.
Besides the possessive genitive forms, the pronouns mãnas, manà 'my', tãvas, tavà 'your', sãvas, savà exist, but are rarely used, e.g., Čià sãvas krãštas 'Here is my homeland'. The substantivized forms manìškis, manìškė 'my,', tavìškis, tavìškė 'your', mūsìškis, mūsìškė, 'our', jūsìškis, jūsìškė 'your' are also used to indicate relatives or friends:

Atvažiãvo mūsìškiai 'Our relatives (friends) came';
Ar̃ tavìškis dár negrį̃žo? 'Hasn't your husband (son, close friend) come back yet?'
9.4 The Reflexive Pronoun savę̃s
The reflexive pronoun savę̃s, etc. generally refers to the subject of the sentence, whatever person the subject may be. Therefore in English it may be translated as 'myself', 'yourself', 'himself', 'ourselves', 'themselves' depending upon whether the subject is 1st, 2nd or 3rd person and whether it is singular or plural.

This pronoun does not have nominative case and plural. savę̃s is declined as folows:

Gen	 	savę̃s
 	 	sàvo
Dat	 	sáu
Acc	 	savè
Inst	 	savimì
 	 	savim̃
Loc	 	savyjè
 	 	savỹ
Examples:

Jì didžiúojasi savimì 'She is proud of herself';
Àš pasižiūrė́jau į̃ savè véidrodyje 'I looked at myself in the mirror';
Jõnas ir̃ Dianà káltino savè už tą̃ klaĩdą 'Jonas and Diana blamed themselves for that mistake';
Mẽs pir̃kom sáu kẽletą daiktų 'We bought some things for ourselves'.
The possessive genitive sàvo refers to the subject of sentence regardless of its person or number:

Àš didžiúojuosi sàvo laimė́jimais 'I am proud of my achievements';
Tù didžiúojiesi sàvo laimė́jimais 'You are proud of your achievements';
Jìs didžiúojasi sàvo laimė́jimais 'He is proud of his achievements';
Mẽs didžiúojamės sàvo laimė́jimais 'We are proud of our achievements', etc.
10 Negation
In Lithuanian four negative particles are used: the principal particles are nè 'no, not' and nebè 'not (any more/longer)', and also nė̃ and neĩ 'not (a)', 'not even'. nebè differs from nè in that it is used to negate continuation of an action or state. It is similar in force to English 'no more, no longer' or the like. nè is more common than nebè. It can be used to response to a question: Ar̃ tù gyvenì Vìlniuje? - Nè 'Do you live in Vilnius? - No'.

In Lithuanian, both 'no' and 'not' are expresssed by the same negative particle nè. In the sense of 'no', nè is set off by comma: Nè, àš nemė́gstu keliaúti 'No, I do not like to travel'. nè and nebè usually precede that word which they negate. They are written together with verbs, adjectives and adverbs:

Gẽras sãpnas nesipìldo 'A good dream does not come true';
Negẽras sãpnas pìldosi 'A bad (not good) dream comes true';
Visì kalbė́jo nerimtaĩ 'Nobody spoke seriously' (lit. 'All spoke not seriously').
There is an exception in case of contrast in the clause, e.g.,

Pìldosi nè gẽras, õ blõgas sãpnas 'A bad dream comes true, not a good (one)';
Jiẽ nè kalbė́jo, bèt šaũkė víenas añt kìto 'They did not speak, but they shouted at each other'.
The negative particle is not written together with a following noun, unless the noun functions as a lexical compound, i. e. has a separate dictionary meaning:

Jìs yrà nè krẽpšininkas, õ fùtbolininkas 'He is not a basketball player, but a football player'.

The negative particle nè with the verbal form yrà 'is, are' forms a contraction nėrà 'is not, are not', e.g., Jiẽ nėrà màno gìminės 'They are not my relatives'.

All the verbs add nè to the positive form to form the negative, e.g., válgyti 'to eat' and neválgyti 'not to eat'; paténkinti 'to satisfy' and nepaténkinti 'not to satisfy'. There are, however, two exceptions: bū́ti 'to be' and eĩti 'to go'. These add only n, e.g., Àš nesù žurnalìstas 'I am not a journalist'; Mẽs dár neĩname namõ 'We do not go home yet'.

The direct object of the negated verb must be in the genitive rather than accusative case, cf: Jì prarãdo vìltį 'She lost hope'; Jì neprarãdo viltiẽs 'She did not lose hope'.

Contrary to English usage, the negative must be repeated, e.g., Rìmas niekadà niẽkur niẽko nesãko 'Ri\mas doesn't ever tell anything anywhere' (lit. 'Rimas doesn't nothing tell nowhere never'); Niẽkas táu jokiõs pagálbos neteĩks 'No one will give you any help' (lit. 'Nobody will not give you any help').

The particle nė̃ denotes emphatic negation, e.g. Tė́vas nė̃ nepàžvelgė į̃ manè 'Father did not even glance at me'. If two or more coordinated words or clauses are negated, the reduplicated negative conjunction neĩ... neĩ 'neither... nor' is used (the predicate usually has the negative prefix in this case). Its meaning is similar to the meaning of neĩ: Nedžiùgino jõs neĩ pinigaĩ, neĩ tur̃tai 'Neither the money nor the wealth gave her joy'.

Lesson 3: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
Among the writers who appeared on the scene in the years 1918-1940, Viñcas Mykoláitis-Pùtinas stands out. This author and literary researcher of enormous intellect distanced himself from the usual tendency in belles-lettres of basing one's work only on the means of expression of the folk language. He searched out means of expression in the written language. The themes of his works were the deciding factor. In his works he didn't depict the village people, but rather the lives of intellectuals and educated people. In his poetry and prose, which are distinguished by their intellectual quality, there are many abstract nouns. He especially liked verbal abstracts, e.g., tobulýbė 'perfection', buitìs 'manner of life', pólėkis 'flight (of fancy)', būtìs 'being, existence', lūkesỹs 'expectation', geĩsmas 'desire', síelgrauža 'mental distress' (literally 'gnawing at the soul'). He used international words abundantly, e.g. harmònija 'harmony', mirãžas 'mirage', iliùzija 'illusion', ideãlas 'ideal,' hierárchija 'hierarchy', chaòsas 'chaos'. He used just the right adjectives with abstract nouns, e.g., álkanas liūdesỹs 'hungry grief, famished melancholy', klaikì vienãtvė 'dreadful loneliness', nerimastìnga buitìs 'anxious way of life'. His novel, In the shadow of the altars, was the first intellectual psychological novel in Lithuanian literature. The principal hero of this Stendhal type novel, Liùdas Vasãris, a seminary student and later a priest, writes poetry and cannot reconcile priest and poet in himself. Obedience to the will of his parents and the desire to serve his country have led him to the seminary. Vasãris overvalues the contribution of the priestly class to Lithuanian culture and chooses the goal of following in the footsteps of the poet-priests Mairónis, Antãnas Baranáuskas, and others. In the shadow of the altars has quite a few autobiographical features. The author of the book himself had experienced the conflict of poet and priest.

Mykoláitis-Pùtinas graduated from seminary and became a priest, but later gave up the priesthood. It is the aforementioned conflict that makes up the intellectual and emotional core of his novel. The attainment of freedom is the essence of the human being and art is the most authentic expression of this essence. Vasãris comes to understand that the priesthood has isolated his talent from the living sources of art, love for experience, natural communication with other human beings, and spontaneous expression without any moralizing. There arises the irresistible urge to experience life for the sake of creativity, so that his talent, a gift of God, might not be destroyed. He is also distinguished by the disharmony and duality of his personality. He seeks out, analyzes, and investigates scrupulously his inner contradictions, on the one hand from the point of view of his priestly duty and on the other hand from the point of view of the imperative of the poet's vocation. His indecisiveness, his compromising surrender to circumstances, resignation, silent suffering, and rebellious internal discontent reflect typical features of the Lithuanian character.

Reading and Textual Analysis
In the selection given below, from the first part of the novel, Vasãris considers three possibilities as to how he should act with his talent. He has already rejected his girl friend and taken the first vows of priesthood. Although he was firmly determined to become a good priest, he still felt that the source of his poetry was not "the virtues required of a clergyman, but the whirlpool of the world infected with the microbes of sin." He is constantly tormented by the thought of how to reconcile the free flight of poetry with the ideals of the life of a priest. These two lives are irreconcilably contrary to each other. What seems natural, understandable and unavoidable in one seems strange and forbidden in the other. He feels that the environment of the seminary is destroying his poetic talent, arousing discord and the splitting of his soul.

In the selection, one can find a fair number of international words and abstract nouns. Adjectives are used abundantly, especially those with the suffixes -ingas, -iškas and -inis; there are also comparisons, e.g., šáltas kaĩp lẽdas 'cold as ice,' nusitvė́rė kaĩp skę̃stąs šiaudẽlio 'grasped for (it) like a drowning man for a straw'.

Pirmàsis galimùmas bùvo visái mèsti tą̃ poèziją ir̃ visàs tàs svajonès.
 Collapse All
pirmàsis -- definite number; nominative singular masculine of <pìrmas, pirmà> first -- the first
galimùmas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <galimùmas> possibility -- possibility
bùvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- was
visái -- adverb; <visái> completely, totally -- completely
mèsti -- verb; infinitive of <mèsti, mẽta, mẽtė> abandon -- to... abandon
tą̃ -- pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- ...
poèziją -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <poèzija> poetry -- poetry
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
visàs -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <vìsas, visà> all -- all
tàs -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- those
svajonès -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <svajõnė> dream -- dreams

Taĩ bū́tų tinkamiáusias ir̃ paprasčiáusias kláusimo sprendìmas.
 Collapse All
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
bū́tų -- verb; 3rd person subjunctive of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- would be
tinkamiáusias -- adjective; nominative singular masculine superlative of <tiñkamas, tinkamà> appropriate -- the most appropriate
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
paprasčiáusias -- adjective; nominative singular masculine superlative of <pàprastas, paprastà> simple -- simplest
kláusimo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kláusimas> question -- to the problem
sprendìmas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <sprendìmas> solution -- solution

Bèt Vasãris nùjautė, kàd jìs vargù ar̃ pajė̃gs išsižadė́ti tų̃ vilčių̃, kuriõs ìš daliẽs jį̃ į̃ seminãriją àtvedė.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
Vasãris -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Vasãris> Vasaris -- Vasaris
nùjautė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <nujaũsti, nujaũčia, nùjautė> feel -- felt
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
vargù -- particle; <vargù> hardly, scarcely -- hardly
ar̃ -- particle; <ar̃> if, or -- ...
pajė̃gs -- verb; 3rd person future of <pajė̃gti, pajė̃gia, pàjėgė> have the strength -- could... have the strength
išsižadė́ti -- verb; infinitive of <išsižadė́ti, išsìžada, išsižadė́jo> give up -- to give up
tų̃ -- pronoun; genitive plural feminine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- those
vilčių̃ -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <viltìs> hope -- hopes
kuriõs -- pronoun; nominative plural feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- which
ìš -- preposition; <ìš> from -- to
daliẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <dalìs> part -- some degree
jį̃ -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- to
seminãriją -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <seminãrija> seminary -- the seminary
àtvedė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <atvèsti, àtveda, àtvedė> bring -- had brought

Seminãrijos gyvẽnimas, tiesà, gerókai jàs apgrióvė, tačiaũ tuo pačiù metù jisaĩ vìs dėlto pamãtė turį̃s tãlentą.
 Collapse All
seminãrijos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <seminãrija> seminary -- seminary
gyvẽnimas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <gyvẽnimas> life -- life
tiesà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <tiesà> truth -- indeed
gerókai -- adverb; <gerókai> rather -- practically
jàs -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- them
apgrióvė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <apgriáuti, apgriáuna, apgrióvė> destroy -- had... destroyed
tačiaũ -- conjunction; <tačiaũ> but -- but
tuo pačiù -- pronoun; instrumental singular masculine of <tas pàts, ta patì> same -- the same
metù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <mẽtas> time -- at... time
jisaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
vìs dėlto -- particle; <vìs dėlto> nevertheless -- nevertheless
pamãtė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <pamatýti, pamãto, pamãtė> see -- saw
turį̃s -- verb; nominative singular masculine of present participle active of <turė́ti, tùri, turė́jo> have -- (that) he had
tãlentą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <tãlentas> talent -- talent

Ir̃ dabar̃ vìsko išsižadė́ti?
 Collapse All
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
dabar̃ -- adverb; <dabar̃> now -- now
vìsko -- pronoun; genitive singular of <vìskas> everything -- everything
išsižadė́ti -- verb; infinitive of <išsižadė́ti, išsìžada, išsižadė́jo> give up -- to give up

Nè, taĩ negãlimas dáiktas.
 Collapse All
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- no
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
negãlimas -- negative particle; <ne> not + adjective; nominative singular masculine of <gãlimas, galimà> impossible -- (is) impossible
dáiktas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <dáiktas> thing -- (a) thing

Antràsis galimùmas siū́lė jám sudẽrinti kūrýbą sù kùnigišku gyvẽnimu.
 Collapse All
antràsis -- definite number; nominative singular masculine of <añtras, antrà> other -- the second
galimùmas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <galimùmas> possibility -- possibility
siū́lė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <siū́lyti, siū́lo, siū́lė> offer -- offered
jám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
sudẽrinti -- verb; infinitive of <sudẽrinti, sudẽrina, sudẽrino> reconcile -- to reconcile
kūrýbą -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <kūrýba> creativity -- creativity
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- with
kùnigišku -- adjective; instrumental singular masculine of <kùnigiškas, kùnigiška> priestly -- priestly
gyvẽnimu -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <gyvẽnimas> life -- the... life

Bèt kaĩp?
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
kaĩp -- adverb; <kaĩp> how -- how

Lig šiõl jám taĩ nepavỹko.
 Collapse All
lig šiõl -- adverb; <lig šiõl> up to now -- up to his time
jám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- ...
nepavỹko -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <pavỹkti, pavỹksta, pavỹko> succeed -- had not succeeded

Jìs žinójo ir̃ tikė́jo, kàd Diẽvas yrà visókios tobulýbės, grõžio ir̃ kilniáusios poèzijos šaltìnis.
 Collapse All
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
žinójo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <žinóti, žìno, žinójo> know -- knew
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
tikė́jo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <tikė́ti, tìki, tikė́jo> believe -- believed
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
Diẽvas -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Diẽvas> God -- God
yrà -- verb; 3rd person present of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- is
visókios -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <visóks, visókia> all -- all
tobulýbės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <tobulýbė> perfection -- of... perfection
grõžio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <grõžis> beauty -- beauty
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
kilniáusios -- adjective; genitive singular feminine superlative of <kilnùs, kilnì> noble -- the noblest
poèzijos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <poèzija> poetry -- poetry
šaltìnis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <šaltìnis> source -- the source

Bèt kodė̃l visì relìginiai, doróviniai, amžinõsios tiesõs, gė̃rio ir̃ grõžio motỹvai jį̃ palìkdavo šáltą kaĩp lẽdą, õ kūrýbinis lỹrinis susijáudinimas vèsdavo į̃ gyvẽnimo žabángas ir̃ pavojùs?
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
kodė̃l -- adverb; <kodė̃l> why -- why
visì -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <vìsas, visà> all -- all the
relìginiai -- adjective; nominative plural masculine <relìginis, relìginė> religious -- religious
doróviniai -- adjective; nominative plural masculine <doróvinis, doróvinė> moral -- (and) moral
amžinõsios -- definite adjective; genitive singular feminine of <ámžinas, amžinà> eternal -- eternal
tiesõs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <tiesà> truth -- of... truth
gė̃rio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <gė̃ris> goodness -- goodness
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
grõžio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <grõžis> beauty -- beauty
motỹvai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <motỹvas> motif -- motifs
jį̃ -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
palìkdavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <palìkti, paliẽka, palìko> leave -- did... leave
šáltą -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <šáltas, šaltà> cold -- (as) cold
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- as
lẽdą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <lẽdas> ice -- ice
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- whereas
kūrýbinis -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <kūrýbinis, kūrýbinė> creative -- creative
lỹrinis -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <lỹrinis, lỹrinė> lyric -- lyric
susijáudinimas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <susijáudinimas> emotion, excitement -- emotion
vèsdavo -- verb; 3rd person frequentative of <vèsti, vẽda, vẽdė> lead -- led
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- to
gyvẽnimo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <gyvẽnimas> life -- of life
žabángas -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <žabánga> trap, snare -- the traps
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
pavojùs -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <pavõjus> danger -- dangers

Õ trečiàsis galimùmas tuõ metù jám bùvo dár tìk pradė́jęs aiškė́ti.
 Collapse All
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- and
trečiàsis -- definite number; nominative singular masculine of <trẽčias, trečià> third -- the third
galimùmas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <galimùmas> possibility -- possibility
tuõ -- pronoun; instrumental singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
metù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <mẽtas> time -- at ... moment
jám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
bùvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- had
dár -- adverb; <dár> even, still -- just
tìk -- particle; <tìk> only -- ...
pradė́jęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pradė́ti, pràdeda, pradė́jo> begin -- begun
aiškė́ti -- verb; infinitive of <aiškė́ti, aiškė́ja, aiškė́jo> become clear -- to become clear

Jõ patiẽs prãktika ródė jám, kàd "kunigãvimas" ir̃ "poetãvimas" yrà dù visái skirtìngi, jéigu nè príešingi, pašaukìmai.
 Collapse All
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- his
patiẽs -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <pàts, patì> own -- own
prãktika -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <prãktika> practice -- practice
ródė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <ródyti, ródo, ródė> show -- had shown
jám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
kunigãvimas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <kunigãvimas> being a priest -- being a priest
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
poetãvimas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <poetãvimas> poeticizing -- poeticizing
yrà -- verb; 3rd person present of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- are
dù -- number; nominative masculine of <dù, dvì> two -- two
visái -- adverb; <visái> completely, totally -- completely
skirtìngi -- adjective; nominative plural masculine of <skirtìngas, skirtìnga> different -- different
jéigu -- conjunction; <jéigu> if -- if
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
príešingi -- adjective; nominative plural masculine of <príešingas, príešinga> opposing -- opposing
pašaukìmai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <pašaukìmas> vocation -- vocations

Tàd kám juõs būtinaĩ jùngti?
 Collapse All
tàd -- conjunction; <tàd> then, thus -- then
kám -- adverb; <kám> why -- why
juõs -- pronoun; accusative plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- them
būtinaĩ -- adverb; <būtinaĩ> necessary -- (is it)necessary
jùngti -- verb; infinitive of <jùngti, jùngia, jùngė> unite, join -- to unite

"Kaĩp kùnigas, àš nè poètas, õ kaĩp poètas, àš nè kùnigas."
 Collapse All
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- as
kùnigas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <kùnigas> priest -- a priest
àš -- pronoun; nominative singular of <àš> I -- I
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- (am) not
poètas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <poètas> poet -- a poet
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- and
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- as
poètas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <poètas> poet -- a poet
àš -- pronoun; nominative singular of <àš> I -- I
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- (am) not
kùnigas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <kùnigas> priest -- a priest

Štaĩ fòrmulė, kurià Liùdas Vasãris savè apgaudinė́jo ìlgą laĩką.
 Collapse All
štaĩ -- particle; <štaĩ> here -- this (is)
fòrmulė -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <fòrmulė> formula -- the formula
kurià -- pronoun; instrumental singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- with which
Liùdas -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Liùdas> Liudas -- Liudas
Vasãris -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Vasãris> Vasaris -- Vasaris
savè -- pronoun; accusative of <savę̃s> oneself, itself -- himself
apgaudinė́jo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <apgaudinė́ti, apgaudinė́ja, apgaudinė́jo> deceive -- deceived
ìlgą -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <ìlgas, ilgà> long -- long
laĩką -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <laĩkas> time -- for a... time

Šìto psichològinio sofìzmo, įvairiomìs atmainomìs gyvẽnime ganà dažnaĩ sutiñkamo, jisaĩ nusitvė́rė kaĩp skę̃stąs šiaudẽlio.
 Collapse All
šìto -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <šìtas, šità> this -- this
psichològinio -- adjective; genitive singular masculine of <psichològinis, psichològinė> psychological -- psychological
sofìzmo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <sofìzmas> sophism -- for... sophism
įvairiomìs -- adjective; instrumental plural feminine of <įvairùs, įvairì> various, different -- various
atmainomìs -- noun, feminine; instrumental plural of <atmainà> guise -- in... guises
gyvẽnime -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <gyvẽnimas> life -- in life
ganà -- adverb; <ganà> rather -- rather
dažnaĩ -- adverb; <dažnaĩ> frequently, often -- frequently
sutiñkamo -- verb; genitive singular masculine of present participle passive of <sutìkti, sutiñka, sutìko> encounter, come across -- encountered
jisaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
nusitvė́rė -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <nusitvérti, nusìtveria, nusitvė́rė> grasp -- grasped
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- like
skę̃stąs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of present participle active of <skę̃sti, skę̃sta, skeñdo> drown -- a drowning (man)
šiaudẽlio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <šiaudẽlis> straw -- (grasping) for a straw

Šità iliùzija ìlgus metùs laĩkė jį̃ pavir̃šiuj, jìs "kunigãvo" ir̃ "poetãvo", õ tuõ tárpu kùnigas ir̃ poètas vãrė jamè žūtbūtìnę tarpùsavio kõvą.
 Collapse All
šità -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <šìtas, šità> this -- this
iliùzija -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <iliùzija> illusion -- illusion
ìlgus -- adjective; accusative plural masculine of <ìlgas, ilgà> long -- long
metùs -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <mẽtai> year -- for... years
laĩkė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <laikýti, laĩko, laĩkė> keep -- kept
jį̃ -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- him
pavir̃šiuj -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <pavir̃šius> surface -- afloat
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
kunigãvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <kunigáuti, kunigáuja, kunigãvo> be a priest -- acted as a priest
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
poetãvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <poetáuti, poetáuja, poetãvo> be a poet -- acted as a poet
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- and
tuõ -- pronoun; instrumental singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- the same
tárpu -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <tárpas> space, period -- at... time
kùnigas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <kùnigas> priest -- the priest
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
poètas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <poètas> poet -- poet
vãrė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <varýti, vãro, vãrė> be engaged -- were engaged in
jamè -- pronoun; locative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- in him
žūtbūtìnę -- adjective; accusative singular feminine of <žūtbūtìnis, žūtbūtìnė> desperate -- desperate
tarpùsavio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <tarpùsavis> between oneself -- ...
kõvą -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <kovà> battle, struggle -- a ... struggle

Jisaĩ užfiksãvo daũgelį šiõs kovõs momeñtų ir̃ mãnė, kàd kùria poèziją.
 Collapse All
jisaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
užfiksãvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <užfiksúoti, užfiksúoja, užfiksãvo> capture -- wrote down
daũgelį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <daũgelis> many -- many
šiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <šìs, šì> this -- this
kovõs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <kovà> battle, struggle -- of ... struggle
momeñtų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <momeñtas> moment -- of the moments
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
mãnė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <manýti, mãno, mãnė> think -- thought
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
kùria -- verb; 3rd person present of <kùrti, kùria, kū́rė> create -- (he) was creating
poèziją -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <poèzija> poetry -- poetry

Tuõ tárpu jìs rãšė sàvo žuvìmo kròniką, vienur̃ kitur̃ pamárgintą tikrù kūrýbos žíedu - liūdnù jõ tãlento liùdininku.
 Collapse All
tuõ -- pronoun; instrumental singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- the same
tárpu -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <tárpas> space, period -- at... time
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
rãšė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <rašýti, rãšo, rãšė> write -- was writing
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- his
žuvìmo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <žuvìmas> ruin -- of... ruin
kròniką -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <krònika> chronicle -- the chronicle
vienur̃ -- adverb; <vienur̃> in one place -- here
kitur̃ -- adverb; <kitur̃> elsewhere -- (and) there
pamárgintą -- verb; accusative singular feminine of preterit participle passive of <pamárginti, pamárgina, pamárgino> mark -- marked
tikrù -- adjective; instrumental singular masculine of <tìkras, tikrà> genuine -- true
kūrýbos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <kūrýba> creativity -- of creativity
žíedu -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <žíedas> blossom, flower -- by a... spark
liūdnù -- adjective; instrumental singular masculine of <liū̃dnas, liūdnà> sad -- sad
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- his
tãlento -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <tãlentas> talent -- of... talent
liùdininku -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <liùdininkas> witness -- the... witness

Lesson Text
Pirmàsis galimùmas bùvo visái mèsti tą̃ poèziją ir̃ visàs tàs svajonès. Taĩ bū́tų tinkamiáusias ir̃ paprasčiáusias kláusimo sprendìmas. Bèt Vasãris nùjautė, kàd jìs vargù ar̃ pajė̃gs išsižadė́ti tų̃ vilčių̃, kuriõs ìš daliẽs jį̃ į̃ seminãriją àtvedė. Seminãrijos gyvẽnimas, tiesà, gerókai jàs apgrióvė, tačiaũ tuo pačiù metù jisaĩ vìs dėlto pamãtė turį̃s tãlentą. Ir̃ dabar̃ vìsko išsižadė́ti? Nè, taĩ negãlimas dáiktas. Antràsis galimùmas siū́lė jám sudẽrinti kūrýbą sù kùnigišku gyvẽnimu. Bèt kaĩp? Lig šiõl jám taĩ nepavỹko. Jìs žinójo ir̃ tikė́jo, kàd Diẽvas yrà visókios tobulýbės, grõžio ir̃ kilniáusios poèzijos šaltìnis. Bèt kodė̃l visì relìginiai, doróviniai, amžinõsios tiesõs, gė̃rio ir̃ grõžio motỹvai jį̃ palìkdavo šáltą kaĩp lẽdą, õ kūrýbinis lỹrinis susijáudinimas vèsdavo į̃ gyvẽnimo žabángas ir̃ pavojùs? Õ trečiàsis galimùmas tuõ metù jám bùvo dár tìk pradė́jęs aiškė́ti. Jõ patiẽs prãktika ródė jám, kàd "kunigãvimas" ir̃ "poetãvimas" yrà dù visái skirtìngi, jéigu nè príešingi, pašaukìmai. Tàd kám juõs būtinaĩ jùngti? "Kaĩp kùnigas, àš nè poètas, õ kaĩp poètas, àš nè kùnigas." Štaĩ fòrmulė, kurià Liùdas Vasãris savè apgaudinė́jo ìlgą laĩką. Šìto psichològinio sofìzmo, įvairiomìs atmainomìs gyvẽnime ganà dažnaĩ sutiñkamo, jisaĩ nusitvė́rė kaĩp skę̃stąs šiaudẽlio. Šità iliùzija ìlgus metùs laĩkė jį̃ pavir̃šiuj, jìs "kunigãvo" ir̃ "poetãvo", õ tuõ tárpu kùnigas ir̃ poètas vãrė jamè žūtbūtìnę tarpùsavio kõvą. Jisaĩ užfiksãvo daũgelį šiõs kovõs momeñtų ir̃ mãnė, kàd kùria poèziją. Tuõ tárpu jìs rãšė sàvo žuvìmo kròniką, vienur̃ kitur̃ pamárgintą tikrù kūrýbos žíedu - liūdnù jõ tãlento liùdininku.
Translation
The first possibility was to completely abandon poetry and all those dreams. That would be the most appropriate and simplest solution to the problem. But Vasaris felt that he could hardly have the strength to give up those hopes, which to some degree had brought him to the seminary. Seminary life, indeed, had practically destroyed them, but at the same time he saw that he had talent nevertheless. And now to give up everything? No, that is an impossible thing.
The second possibility offered him (the chance) to reconcile creativity with the priestly life. But how? Up to this time he had not succeeded. He knew and believed that God is the source of all perfection, beauty and the noblest poetry. But why did all the religious and moral motifs of eternal truth, goodness and beauty leave him as cold as ice, whereas creative lyric emotion led to the traps and dangers of life?
But at that moment the third possibility just began to become clear. His own practice had shown him that being a priest and poeticizing are two completely different, if not opposing vocations. Then why is it necessary to unite them? 'As a priest I am not a poet, and as a poet I am not a priest.' This is the formula with which Liudas Vasaris deceived himself for a long time. Like a drowning man (grasping) for a straw, he grasped for this psychological sophism, rather frequently encountered in various guises in life. For long years this illusion kept him afloat; he acted as a priest and acted as a poet, and at the same time the priest and poet in him were engaged in a desperate struggle. He wrote down many of the moments of this struggle and thought that he was creating poetry. At the same time he was writing the chronicle of his ruin, here and there marked by a true spark of creativity, the sad witness of his talent.
Grammar
11 The Accent Classes of the Nouns
There are four accent classes of the nouns in Lithuanian. The principal criterion for the attribution of a noun to one or another class is its stress pattern in the dative and the accusative plural. Some nouns have a constant stress, e.g., in all cases the stress falls on one and the same syllable. But in the majority of nouns the stress alternates between the ending and the stem.

Accentuation is rather difficult even for native speakers. In colloquial Lithuanian they often shift the stress from the short ending to the stem.

The current four accent classes developed from the earlier two accent paradigms (the barytone (fixed) stress paradigm and the mobile stress paradigm). The shifting of the stress defined by de Saussure's law determined the development of the present Lithuanian accentuation system. According to this law, the stress passes from a short or circumflex (rising) syllabic nucleus to an acute (falling) one.

In dictionaries the accent class is indicated in Arabic numerals: 1; 2; 3; 4; e.g., áuksas 1 'gold'; pir̃štas 2 'finger'; béržas 3 'birch'; ausìs 4 'ear'. Knowing the peculiarities of each accent class, we can locate the stress and use the appropriate accent in all the forms of the noun. Dictionary listings of adjectives, numerals and pronouns provide information on accent class.

11.1 The First Accent Class
The first accent class comprises nouns which in the dative and accusative plural always have their stress on one and the same syllable of the stem.

In two-syllable nouns the stress is always on the first syllable and it is always an acute, e.g., kója 'leg'; žéntas 'son-in-law'. In polysyllabic nouns, one can have either the acute or the circumflex, or the syllable may be short, e.g., vãsara 'summer'; bū́sena 'state, condition'; dìdvyris 'hero'. But when the stress falls on the penultimate syllable only the acute is possible, e.g., saváitė 'week'; varnė́nas 'starling'.

The stress always remains on the same syllable in all the cases in the singular and plural if the noun belongs to the first accent class. This is the most important feature of the first accent class.

Nom sg	 	kója 'leg'	 	žìrnis 'pea'	 	ãdata 'needle'	 	lùpena 'peel'
Gen sg	 	kójos	 	žìrnio	 	ãdatos	 	lùpenos
Dat sg	 	kojai	 	žìrniui	 	ãdatai	 	lùpenai
Acc sg	 	kóją	 	žìrnį	 	ãdatą	 	lùpeną
Inst sg	 	kója	 	žìrniu	 	ãdata	 	lùpena
Loc sg	 	kójoj(e)	 	žìrny(je)	 	ãdatoj(e)	 	lùpenoj(e)
Voc sg	 	kója	 	žìrni	 	ãdata	 	lùpena
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	kójos	 	žìrniai	 	ãdatos	 	lùpenos
Gen pl	 	kójų	 	žìrnių	 	ãdatų	 	lùpemų
Dat pl	 	kójom(s)	 	žìrniam(s)	 	ãdatom(s)	 	lùpenom(s)
Acc pl	 	kójas	 	žìrnius	 	ãdatas	 	lùpenas
Inst pl	 	kójom(is)	 	žìniais	 	ãdatom(is)	 	lùpenom(is)
Loc pl	 	kójose	 	žìrniuos(e)	 	ãdatose	 	lùpenose
Voc pl	 	kójos	 	žìrniai	 	ãdatos	 	lùpenos
11.2 The Second Accent Class
The second accent class comprises nouns which in the dative plural have their stress on the stem, while in the accusative plural they are stressed on the ending, e.g., dative plural bãtams 'shoes', acc.pl. batùs; dat.pl. pùpoms 'beans', acc.pl. pupàs.

The penultimate syllable has the circumflex or the short intonation. The circumflex or the short stress remains constant, except: in the (a) instrumental singular and (b) accusative plural. If the noun ends in -as, then in addition to the two cases above, the locative singular is also stressed on the ending, e.g., loc.sg. batè 'shoe'. If the noun has -a in nominative singular, then this -a is stressed, e.g., nom.sg. pupà 'bean'.

Nom sg	 	pir̃štas 'finger'	 	vištà 'hen'	 	laũmė 'witch'
Gen sg	 	pir̃što	 	vìštos	 	laũmės
Dat sg	 	pir̃štui	 	vìštai	 	laũmei
Acc sg	 	pir̃štą	 	vìštą	 	laũmę
Inst sg	 	pirštù	 	vištà	 	laumè
Loc sg	 	pirštè	 	vìštoj(e)	 	laũmėj(e)
Voc sg	 	pir̃šte	 	vìšta	 	laũme
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	pir̃štai	 	vìštos	 	laũmės
Gen pl	 	pir̃štų	 	vìštų	 	laũmių
Dat pl	 	pir̃štam(s)	 	vìštom(s)	 	laũmėm(s)
Acc pl	 	pirštùs	 	vištàs	 	laumès
Inst pl	 	pir̃štais	 	vìštom(is)	 	laũmėm(is)
Loc pl	 	pir̃štuos(e)	 	vìštose	 	laũmėse
Voc pl	 	pir̃štai	 	vìštos	 	laũmės
12 Pronouns
12.1 The Demonstrative Pronouns
Demonstrative pronouns refer to:

a definite person or phenomenon (tàs, tà 'this', 'that'; šìs, šì, šìtas, šìta / šità 'this'; anàs, anà 'that'; tas pàts, ta patì 'the same');
a definite property of a person or phenomenon (tóks, tokià 'such a'; šióks, šiokià, šìtoks, šìtokia 'this kind of'; anóks, anókia 'that kind of');
a situation (taĩ 'it'; šìta(i) 'it', tas pàt(s) 'the same').
The demonstrative šìs contrasts with tàs. Both šìs and tàs contrast with anàs which denotes a third object which is farther away than objects referred to by tàs, e.g.,

Šis nãmas yrà màno, tàs nãmas yrà tàvo, õ anàs nãmas yrà jõ
'This house is mine, that house is yours, but the one over there is his'.
Demonstrative pronouns can be used both as nouns and as adjectives, e.g.,

Draugaĩ kviẽčia Diãną eĩti papietáuti, õ šì sė́di ir̃ žiū̃ri prõ lángą 'Friends invite Diana to go out to dinner, but she (the latter) sits and looks out the window'.
Bèt Vasãris nùjautė, kàd jìs vargù ar̃ pajė̃gs išsižadė́ti tų̃ vilčių̃ 'But Vasaris felt that he could hardly have the strength to give up those hopes'.
When šìs, šì, tàs, tà, anàs, anà are used as adjectives (before a noun), they contribute definite status to the noun.

The pronouns šìtoks, šìtokia, tóks, tokià can also used before nouns as intensifiers, e.g., Šìtokia baisì avãrija 'such a terrible accident'.

The declension of šìs, šì is like that of the personal pronouns jìs, jì. The demonstrative pronouns tàs, tà and tòks, tokià are declined as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	tàs 'this'	 	tà	 	tóks 'such a'	 	tokià
Gen sg	 	tõ	 	tõs	 	tókio	 	tokiõs
Dat sg	 	tám	 	tái	 	tokiám	 	tókiai
Acc sg	 	tą̃	 	tą	 	tókį	 	tókią
Inst sg	 	tuõ	 	tà	 	tókiu	 	tokià
Loc sg	 	tamè	 	tojè	 	tokiamè	 	tokiojè
 	 	tam̃	 	tõj	 	tokiam̃	 	tokiõj
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	tiẽ	 	tõs	 	tokiẽ	 	tókios
Gen pl	 	tų̃	 	tų̃	 	tokių̃	 	tokių̃
Dat pl	 	tíems	 	tóms	 	tokíems	 	tokióms
 	 	tíem	 	tóm	 	tokíem	 	tokióm
Acc pl	 	tuõs	 	tàs	 	tókius	 	tókias
Inst pl	 	taĩs	 	tomìs	 	tokiaĩs	 	tokiomìs
 	 	 	 	tõm	 	 	 	tokiõm
Loc pl	 	tuosè	 	tosè	 	tokiuosè	 	tokiosè
 	 	tuõs	 	 	 	tokiuõs	 	 
The declension of šìtas, šità is exactly like that of tàs, tà. Anóks, anókia and šìtoks, šìtokia have the same endings as tóks, tokià, but the stress pattern is different (always on the same syllable). These pronouns have influenced the declension of the adjectives.

12.2 The Interrogative and Relative Pronouns
All intrrogative and relative pronouns begin with the consonant k: kàs 'what', 'who'; kóks, kokià 'what kind of'; kurìs, kurì 'which'; katràs, katrà 'which of two'; kelì, kẽlios 'how many', kelerì, kẽlerios 'how many (used with pluralia tantum); keliñtas, kelintà 'which'.

The interrogative pronoun kàs 'who, what' is declined as follows:

Nom sg	 	kàs 'who, what'
Gen sg	 	kõ, kienõ
Dat sg	 	kám
Acc sg	 	ką̃
Inst sg	 	kuõ
Loc sg	 	kamè
This pronoun has no plural declension and it may refer to either masculine or feminine nouns or pronouns. Kienõ 'whose', 'of whom', 'by whom' is used to denote possession or as the subject or agent of a passive verbal construction, whereas kõ is reserved for other genitive uses, cf:

Kàs jį̃ sumušė? 'Who beat him up'?
Kienõ jìs bùvo sùmuštas? 'By whom was he beaten up'?
Kõ jám nepasìsekė išvéngti? 'What was he not able to avoid'?
Kóks, kokià are declined like tóks, tokià; kurìs, kurì are declined like jìs, jì; katràs, katrà are declined like tàs, tà; kelerì, kẽlerios are declined like kelì, kẽlios; keliñtas, kelintà are declined like regular adjectives.

Kelì and kẽlios are used only in the plural:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom	 	kelì 'how many'	 	kẽlios
Gen	 	kelių̃	 	kelių̃
Dat	 	kelíems, keliém	 	kelióms, kelióm
Acc	 	kelìs	 	keliàs
Inst	 	keliaĩs	 	keliomìs, keliõm
Loc	 	keliuosè, keliuõs	 	keliosè
When these pronouns introduce a direct question, they are interrogatives:

Kienõ tàs automobìlis? 'Whose car is that'?
Kàs gãli atsakýti į̃ šį̃ klaúsimą? 'Who can answer this question'?
Kurì suknẽlė táu patiñka? 'Which dress do you like?'
Kókias knygàs jū̃s pardavinė́jate? 'What kind of books do you sell'?
Kas, kurìs, kurì, kóks, kokià can also be used as relative pronouns. The number and the gender of the relative pronoun are determined by the word to which it refers, but the case of this pronoun is determined by its use in the clause of which it is a part, e.g.:

Mán patiñka tà suknẽlė, kurią̃ tù mán nupirkaĩ
'I like the dress which you have bought for me'.
The relative pronoun kurią̃ is feminine and singular because it refers to suknẽlė which is feminine and singular, but it is in the accusative case because it is the object of the verb nupirkaĩ.

Kokià žiemà, tokià ir̃ vãsara 'Whatever the winter is (like) thus also is the summer'.

12.3 The Indefinite Pronouns
Kàs 'someone', 'somebody', 'something' may be used as an indefinite pronoun by itself, e.g., Jám turbū́t pasivaidẽno kàs 'He probably imagined somebody'.

Kàs, kòks and kurìs also may be used in conjunction with nórs, kažì(n) and kaž-. Kas nórs, koks nórs, kuris nórs have the meaning 'someone', 'somebody', 'anybody' 'something', 'some kind of':

Gál norė́tų kas nórs padirbė́ti?
'Would anybody like to work for some time'?
Kažkàs, kažkóks, kažkurìs share a common semantic element meaning 'uncertain', someone not known', 'what', 'which', 'what kind of'. The same meaning is shared by the corresponding compound pronouns with the first component kažì(n), e.g., kaži(n) kàs, kaži(n) kóks, kaži(n) kurìs:

Tòmas išvýdo kažin kókį keĩstą dáiktą
'Tomas saw some strange thing'.
13 Adjective Inflection
Adjectives agree in gender, number and case with words they modify. As attributes, adjectives can be used only with nouns, e.g., pàprastas sprendìmas 'a simple decision'.

There are three gender forms of adjectives in Lithuanian: masculine, feminine and neuter. All adjectives can have masculine forms and the respective feminine forms, e.g., nominative singular masculine liū̃dnas 'sad', kilnùs 'noble'; nominative singular feminine liūdnà, kilnì. The neuter forms can be derived by dropping the -s from the masculine nominative singular, cf.: nominative singular masculine liū̃dnas and neuter liū̃dna; nominative singular masculine kilnùs and neuter kilnù. These forms are generally used in certain impersonal constructions as part of the nominal predicate:

Mán liū̃dna 'I am sad' (lit. 'To me is sad');
Čià bùvo tamsù 'Here it was dark'.
The present tense forms of bū́ti 'to be' are mostly omitted in such sentences.

The qualitative adjectives have degrees of comparison. As in English, there are three basic degrees of comparison in Lithuanian: the positive, the comparative, and the superlative, e.g., positive liū̃dnas 'sad', sunkùs 'difficult', 'heavy'; comparative liūdnèsnis 'sadder', sunkèsnis 'more difficult', 'heavier'; superlative liūdniáusias 'the saddest', sunkiáusias 'the most difficult', 'the heaviest'. Descriptive adjectives can have definite forms, which in addition to their lexical meaning of the quality contribute definite status to the noun they determine, e.g., amžinóji tiesà 'the eternal truth'. Historically, definite forms derived from the blend of adjectival endings with the pronoun jìs 'he', jì 'she', e.g., amžinàsis 'eternal-he', amžinóji 'eternal-she'.

Masculine and feminine adjectives have two numbers: singular and plural.

All adjectives are traditionally classified into three declensions. The easiest way to determine which declension an adjective belongs is by checking the endings in the nominative singular and the nominative plural.

Declension	 	Nom.sg.masc.	 	Nom.pl.masc.	 	Nom.sg.fem.	 	Nom.pl.fem.	 	Stem
1st	 	-(i)as	 	-i	 	 	 	 	 	(i)a
 	 	 	 	 	 	-(i)a	 	-(i)os	 	(i)o
2nd	 	-us	 	-ūs	 	 	 	 	 	(i)u
 	 	 	 	 	 	-i	 	-ios	 	(i)o
3rd	 	-is	 	-iai	 	 	 	 	 	(i)a
 	 	 	 	 	 	-ė	 	-ės	 	ė
The declension of masculine and feminine adjectives is quite different. Since early times, feminine adjectives were declined like nouns, but the masculine adjectives have adopted some of the endings of the gendered pronouns, cf.: dative singular masculine liūdnám 'sad' and tám 'that'; locative singular masculine liūdnamè and tamè; nominative plural masculine liūdnì and tiẽ; dative plural masculine liūdníems and tíems.

13.2 First Declension Adjectives
All adjectives ending in -(i)as (masculine nominative singular) and -(i)a (feminine nominative singular) belong to the first declension. The declension of these adjectives should be compared with that of the first and second declension nouns. The declension of the masculine adjectives differs in the dative and locative singular and the nominative and dative plural from that of the first declension nouns.

The forms of the 1st declension adjectives are as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	pìktas 'angry'	 	piktà	 	žãlias 'green'	 	žalià
Gen sg	 	pìkto	 	piktõs	 	žãlio	 	žaliõs
Dat sg	 	piktám	 	pìktai	 	žaliám	 	žãliai
Acc sg	 	pìktą	 	pìktą	 	žãlią	 	žãlią
Inst sg	 	piktù	 	piktà	 	žaliù	 	žalià
Loc sg	 	piktamè	 	piktojè	 	žaliamè	 	žaliojè
 	 	piktam̃	 	piktõj	 	žaliam̃	 	žaliõj
Voc sg	 	pìktas	 	piktà	 	žãlias	 	žalià
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	piktì	 	pìktos	 	žalì	 	žãlios
Gen pl	 	piktų̃	 	piktų̃	 	žalių̃	 	žalių̃
Dat pl	 	piktíems	 	piktóms	 	žalíems	 	žalióms
 	 	piktíem	 	piktóm	 	žalíem	 	žalióm
Acc pl	 	piktùs	 	piktàs	 	žaliùs	 	žaliàs
Inst pl	 	piktaĩs	 	piktomìs	 	žaliaĩs	 	žaliomìs
 	 	 	 	piktõm	 	 	 	žaliõm
Loc pl	 	piktuosè	 	piktosè	 	žaliuosè	 	žaliosè
 	 	piktuõs	 	 	 	žaliuõs	 	 
Voc pl	 	piktì	 	pìktos	 	žalì	 	žãlios
13.3 Second Declension Adjectives
Adjectives belonging to the 2nd declension are characterized by the ending -us in the masculine nominative singular and the ending -i in the feminine nominative singular.

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	gilùs 'deep'	 	gilì	 	saldùs 'sweet'	 	saldì
Gen sg	 	gilaũs	 	giliõs	 	saldaũs	 	saldžiõs
Dat sg	 	giliám	 	gìliai	 	saldžiám	 	sáldžiai
Acc sg	 	gìlų	 	gìlią	 	sáldų	 	sáldžią
Inst sg	 	giliù	 	gilià	 	sáldžiu	 	sáldžia
Loc sg	 	giliamè	 	giliojè	 	saldžiamè	 	saldžiojè
 	 	giliam̃	 	giliõj	 	saldžiam̃	 	saldžiõj
Voc sg	 	gilùs	 	gilì	 	saldùs	 	saldì
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	gìlūs	 	gìlios	 	sáldūs	 	sáldžios
Gen pl	 	gilių̃	 	gilių̃	 	saldžių̃	 	saldžių̃
Dat pl	 	gilíems	 	gilióms	 	saldíems	 	saldžióms
 	 	gilíem	 	gilióm	 	saldíem	 	saldžióm
Acc pl	 	giliùs	 	giliàs	 	sáldžius	 	sáldžias
Inst pl	 	giliaĩs	 	giliomìs	 	saldžiaĩs	 	saldžiomìs
 	 	 	 	giliõm	 	 	 	saldžiõm
Loc pl	 	giliuosè	 	giliosè	 	saldžiuosè	 	saldžiosè
 	 	giliuõs	 	 	 	saldžiuõs	 	 
Voc pl	 	gìlūs	 	gìlios	 	sáldūs	 	sáldžios
The -ti- and -di- of the feminine nominative singular are replaced by -či- and -dži- respectively in position before the vowels -a-, -o-, -u- in the second declension of adjectives, cf.: nominative singular masculine kartùs 'bitter' and instrumental singular masculine kárčiu; nominative singular masculine saldùs 'sweet' and instrumental singular masculine sáldžiu, etc. In this position, -č- and -dž- merely denote a soft or palatalized -č- or -dž- sound; the letter -i- here does not denote a vowel, but merely the softening or palatalization of the preceding consonant. The endings of the nouns of the 4th declension should be carefully compared with the masculine endings above, cf.: sūnùs 'son' and 'gilùs 'deep'. The endings of feminine nouns in -i of the second declension should be carefully compared with the feminine endings above, cf.: martì 'daughter-in-law' and saldì 'sweet'.

13.4 Third Declension Adjectives
The nominative singular of all adjectives in this declension ends in -is for the masculine and -ė for the feminine.

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	auksìnis 'golden'	 	auksìnė	 	vilnõnis 'woolen'	 	vilnõnė
Gen sg	 	auksìnio	 	auksìnės	 	vilnõnio	 	vilnõnės
Dat sg	 	auksìniam	 	auksìnei	 	vilnõniam	 	vilnõnei
Acc sg	 	auksìnį	 	auksìnę	 	vilnõnį	 	vilnõnę
Inst sg	 	auksiniù	 	auksinè	 	vilnoniù	 	vilnonè
Loc sg	 	auksìniame	 	auksìnėje	 	vilnõniame	 	vilnõnėje
 	 	auksìniam	 	auksìnėj	 	vilnõniam	 	vilnõnėj
Voc sg	 	auksìni(s)	 	auksìne	 	vilnõni(s)	 	vilnõne
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	auksìniai	 	auksìnės	 	vilnõniai	 	vilnõnės
Gen pl	 	auksìnių	 	auksìnių	 	vilnõnių	 	vilnõnių
Dat pl	 	auksìniams	 	auksìnėms	 	vilnõniams	 	vilnõnėms
 	 	auksìniam	 	auksìnėm	 	vilnõniam	 	vilnõnėm
Acc pl	 	auksiniùs	 	auksinès	 	vilnoniùs	 	vilnonès
Inst pl	 	auksìniais	 	auksìnėmis	 	vilnõniais	 	vilnõnėmis
 	 	 	 	auksìnėm	 	 	 	vilnõnėm
Loc pl	 	auksìniuose	 	auksìnėse	 	vilnõniuose	 	vilnõnėse
 	 	auksìniuos	 	 	 	vilnõniuos	 	 
Voc pl	 	auksìniai	 	auksìnės	 	vilnõniai	 	vilnõnės
Third declension adjectives are usually derived from nouns, cf.:

n. áuksas 'gold' and adj. auksìnis 'gold', 'golden';
n. vìlna 'wool' and adj. vilnõnis 'woolen';
n. ãkcija 'stock' and adj. ãkcinis 'joint-stock';
n. stãlas 'table', 'desk' and adj. stalìnis 'table', 'desk'.
Some adjectives of this declension are also derived from other adjectives and past passive participles, cf.:

adj. lýgus 'flat', 'even' and adj. lýginis 'even';
past.pass.ptc. pir̃ktas 'purchased', 'bought' and adj. pirktìnis 'purchased', 'bought'.
14 Mood
14.1 The Subjunctive Mood
The subjunctive mood indicates a possible action. The simple forms of the subjunctive mood are formed by removing the infinitive ending -ti and adding the endings listed below:

1st sg	 	láuk-čiau 'I should wait'	 	turė́-čiau 'I should have'	 	bū́-čiau 'I should be'
2nd sg	 	láuk-tum	 	turė́-tum	 	bū́-tum
3rd sg	 	láuk-tų	 	turė́-tų	 	bū́-tų
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	láuk-tume	 	turė́-tume	 	bū́-tume
 	 	láuk-tumėm(e)	 	turė́-tumėm(e)	 	bū́-tumėm(e)
2nd pl	 	láuk-tute	 	turė́-tute	 	bū́-tute
 	 	láuk-tumėt(e)	 	turė́-tumėt(e)	 	bū́-tumėt(e)
3rd pl	 	láuktų	 	turė́-tų	 	bū́-tų
The subjunctive mood has two parallel forms for the 1st and the 2nd person plural. It is commonly believed that the longer forms are more common than the shorter ones. In dialects and old writings there is an even greater variety of subjunctive forms.

The compound subjunctive forms consist of the simple forms of the auxiliary bū́ti 'to be' and active or passive participles, e.g., bū́tum žinójęs 'you would have known'; bū́tų žìnomas 'he would be known'.

As subjunctive mood forms have an infinitive stem, they preserve the stress and intonation of the infinitive.

The subjunctive mood may be used in both the main clause and the if-clause of a sentence which contains a contrary-to-fact condition, e.g.:

Jéi paprašýtum, paskõlinčiau 'If you would ask, I would lend';
Jéigu tù bū́tum protingèsnė, taĩp dabar̃ nekalbė́tum 'If you were wiser, you would not speak like this now'.
If there is no contrary-to-fact condition, then the subjunctive mood is not required, e.g., Jéi paprašýsi, paskõlinsiu 'If you ask, I shall lend'; Jéi netùri, neduók 'If you do not have, don't give'. The future tense (not the present, as in English) is used with jéi 'if', when a future time is implied.

The subjunctive mood is also used to express purpose, generally with the subordinating conjunction kàd 'that', 'in order that', e.g.,

Jis padėjo pìnigus añt stãlo, kád visì matýtų 'He put the money on the table in order that everyone would see (it)';
Àš nóriu, kà tù atvažiúotum 'I want you to come' (lit. I want that you would come).
Lithuanian does not use the object of a verb of wishing or saying as the subject of an infinitive as in English.

14.2 Imperative
There are three basic forms of imperative in Lithuanian: 2nd person singular, 1st person plural, and 2nd person plural. As a rule, the action is addressed to another person. Hence the most common forms of the imperative are 2nd person singular and 2nd person plural.

2nd sg	 	skaitýk 'read'	 	turė́k 'have'	 	bū́k
1st pl	 	skaitýkim(e)	 	turė́kim(e)	 	bū́kim(e)
2nd pl	 	skaitýkit(e)	 	turė́kit(e)	 	bū́kit(e)
The formation of these forms is fairly simple:

2nd person singular: drop the -ti from the infinitive, add -k: skaity + k = skaitýk;
1st person plural: drop the -ti from the infinitive, add -kime: skaity + kime = skaitýkim(e);
2nd person plural: drop the -ti from the infinitive, add -kite: skaity + kite = skaitýkit(e).
The stress is the same as for the infinitive.

The 2nd person singular is used in addressing children, animals, close friends, members of the immediate family and God. The 2nd person plural is used to address a group of persons or animals, or to address one person politely. The 1st person plural renders the English 'let us', e.g., skaitykim 'let us read'.

Frequently the first person plural of the present tense when used without a pronoun has hortative meaning:

Per̃kam! 'Let's buy'!
Dainúojam! 'Let's sing'!
14.3 The Optative Mood
Traditionally, the imperative mood includes the forms of the optative (permisive) mood. The inclusion of the optative mood raises problems, since the optative mood is permissive, not imperative.

The optative may be formed by prefixing te- to the third person form of the verb, e.g., te-skaĩto 'may he (she) read', 'let him (her) read; te-eĩna 'may he (she) go', 'let him (her) go'. Sometimes these forms are created by a synthetic combination of tegul̃ 'let...' or tegù 'let...' with the third person of the verb, e.g., tegul̃ skaĩto 'may he (she) read', 'let him (her) read'; tegù eĩna 'may he (she) go', 'let him (her) go'.

An alternative formation is furnished by adding the endings -ai (for the verbs of the third conjungation) or -ie for other verbs to the present stem, e.g., 3 pres. skaĩt-o 'reads', opt. te-skaĩt-ai 'may he (she) read', 'let him (her) read'; 3 pres. eĩn-a 'goes', opt. te-ein-iẽ 'may he (she) go', 'let him (her) go'. These forms are recognized as archaic; they are found in older Lithuanian writings. The only verb used fairly often in Standard Lithuanian is the verb bū́ti 'to be': tebūniẽ, teesiẽ 'let it be'. They are also found in prayers:

Teesiẽ šveñtas tàvo var̃das 'Hallowed be Thy name';
Teateiniẽ tàvo karalỹstė 'Thy kingdom come';
Tebūniẽ tàvo valià kaĩp dangujè taĩp ir̃ žẽmėje 'Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven'.
15 Interrogative Words and Interrogative Sentences
In Lithuanian most interrogative sentences are similar in structure to declarative sentences. They can be marked by intonation alone and, sometimes, by word order:

Tù namiẽ? 'Are you at home'?;
Jìs tikraĩ gìmė Pietų̃ Ãfrikoje? 'Was he really born in South Africa'?
Rašýti baĩgėt? 'Did you finish writing'?
General questions either contain no interrogative marker, or may begin with the particles ar̃, ar̃gi, gál, nejaũ, nejaũgi. The affirmative answer begins with the affirmative particle taĩp 'yes', and the negative answer with nè 'no':

Ar̃ mẽs dalyváusime? 'Will we be taking part'?; Taĩp, bè jokiõs abejõnės 'Yes, without any doubt';
Gál jùms padė́ti? 'May I help you'? Ãčiū, nè (or nereĩkia) 'No, thank you' (or 'it is not necessary');
Nejaũgi jiẽ suklýdo? 'Did they really make a mistake'? Taip̃, suklýdo 'Yes, they did'.
Special questions usually require a concrete answer. They are formed with various case forms of the interrogative pronouns kàs 'who, what', kurìs 'which', kóks 'what (kind of)', kelì 'how many', keliñtas 'which' (of the ordinal number), and with the interrogative adverbs kur̃ 'where', kadà 'when', kaĩp 'how', kodė̃l 'why', kíek 'how many'. These markers are placed initially:

Kàs čià atsitìko? 'What has happened'? Dúrys užsìtrenkė 'The door slammed';
Kám tù norė́tum paskam̃binti? 'Whom would you like to call'? Sàvo draugáms Lietuvojè 'My friends in Lithuania';
Kur̃ jìs išvažiúoja? 'Where is he leaving for'? Į Kìniją 'For China'.
Kodė̃l jū̃s tóks pìktas? 'Why are you so angry'? 'Pa\mec^iau pinigi\ne*' 'I have lost my purse'.
Lithuanian also uses "tag questions" but, compared to English, they are less common. There are several ways to express 'do you', 'don't you', 'haven't you', 'will you', won't you', 'aren't you', etc., in Lithuanian. Literally the negative question ar̃ nè? means 'is it not', 'was it not', 'will it not (be)', etc. after positive statements. The word tiesà? 'true, correct'? can be used both after positive and negative statements. Ar̃ nè tiesà? 'is it not so'? is used after positive statements, but sometimes also after negative sentences or clauses:

Jì daininiñkė, ar̃ nè? 'She is a singer, isn't she'?
Mìlda niekadà nesugrį̃š, tiesà? 'Milda will never come back, will she'?
Žmónės yrà liñkę slė̃pti tikrúosius jausmùs, ar̃ nè tiesà? 'People have an inclination to hide their real feelings, don't they'?
Tù pasiteiravaĩ, kodė̃l jiẽ neatvỹko, ar̃ nè 'You asked why they had not come, didn't you'?

Lesson 4: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
After the Second World War, East Prussia fell to Russia. Practically no local inhabitants remained in this land. All the Lithuanian place names of this area were replaced with Russian place names. Such a pitiless historical fate befell the land in which the first Lithuanian book, Martýnas Mãžvydas' Catechism (1547), was published, where Daniel Klein's first Lithuanian grammar (1653) appeared, where Jõnas Bretkū́nas for the first time translated the Bible, where the chef-d'oeuvre of world fame, Mẽtai 'The seasons' was written by Kristijõnas Doneláitis, where the first Lithuanian newspaper (1822) appeared, and where the first herald of the renaissance of the Lithuanian nation, the newspaper Aušrà 'Dawn' (1883-1886) was published.

Mãžvydas, Bretkū́nas, Doneláitis, etc. What do I know? Maybe I am their distant relative, said the author, Ievà Simonaitýtė, whose mother boasted that she was a descendant of the Old Prussians.

As Výtautas Kubìlius, one of the most prominent scholars of the Lithuanian literature, says, Ievà Simonaitýtė, writing her first novel The Fate of the Simoniai from the Village of Aukstujai (1935), felt it her duty as an artist (literally: 'with the artistic word') to encompass the picturesque aspect of Lithuania Minor, its historical memory, its spiritual substance. She was concerned with describing not only the obviously evident patriarchal way of life of the Prussian Lithuanians (lietùvninkai), but to look into remnants of the old beliefs and moral precepts in view of the German newcomers. She understood that the literature of a small nation would lose its roots if it did not consider the problems of national existence. Simonaitýtė poeticized the way of life of the Prussian Lithuanians considering it essential for the endurance and survival of the people. Still she felt the illusory character of such poeticization in the whirlpools of the XXth century unifying civilization and the policy of denationalization carried out by the great empires -- a cruel fate, coming to East Prussia after the raging 1709 plague destroyed seven generations of honorable Prussian Lithuanians. German colonists began to move into lands that had been thinned out by the plague. Here they act(ed) like the real masters. All the heroes of the chronicle of this family are marked with the elegy of defeat. Simonaitýtė feels that the time of this Lithuanian tribe is at an end. Only the old names recall many of their former habitats, and these old names will soon be changed. Simonaitýtė wrote The fate of the Simoniai from the village of Aukstujai, keeping before her eyes the model of the novel-family chronicle that is popular in the German Heimatdichtung literature.

Reading and Textual Analysis
Here we give a selection from the first pages of Aukstujũ Šimonių̃ likìmas. In it, the castle tower of the family of Simonis the boyar, built on the bank of the river Įsrà before the beginning of the raging plague of 1709, is described. This tower is the personified symbol of all of Lithuania Minor and its fate. Formerly it had been the tower of a strong Lithuanian castle that had protected Lithuanians from enemies. Now its protection is no longer needed, since the Lithuanians have long been in the power of foreigners. Yet the tower itself still doesn't understand how alone it is, neglected and comical, although it is still proud and retains in its memory the former Lithuanian power.

Simonaitýtė spoke the Samogitian Lithuanian dialect of the Klaĩpėda region. In this excerpt, she uses the definite form of the pronoun añs, ansaĩ 'that'; the particle mandìng, characteristic of this area, which means 'most likely, it seems to me'; the noun žizdraĩ, which means 'grains of sand, small particles of sand'; and the word ponỹstė, characteristic of old literature, which means 'kingdom, country'. Also, constructions with participles, gerunds and half-participles are abundantly used. This is one of the most characteristic features of the language of this area, e.g., piliẽs bū́ta 'there was, it seems, a castle'; ámžiams sleñkant 'the centuries passing, in the course of centuries'; gáudydami víenas kìtą 'chasing each other'; yrà užmir̃šęs 'have forgotten', etc. Definite forms are frequent in her work, although in this excerpt there are only two: griū̃vancioji pilìs 'the crumbling castle' and ansaĩ prótėvis 'that ancestor'. This excerpt reflects a somewhat different word order compared with contemporary standard Lithuanian, láisvės kokiõs 'some kind of freedom'; tvìrtus sáu, sàvo vaikáms ir̃ vaikų̃ vaikáms namùs, literally 'a solid, for himself, his children and his children's children, house'.

Šiañdien jaũ niẽkam nebereĩkia tõ bókšto sargýbos.
 Collapse All
šiañdien -- adverb; <šiañdien> today -- today
jaũ -- particle; <jaũ> already, just -- ...
niẽkam -- pronoun; dative singular of <niẽkas> no one, nobody, nothing -- nobody
nebereĩkia -- negative particle; <nebe> not any more + verb; 3rd person present of <reikė́ti, reĩkia, reikė́jo> need -- not need any more
tõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
bókšto -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <bókštas> tower -- of tower
sargýbos -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <sargýba> guard, protection -- the protection

Šiañdien jõ plyšiúotos síenos nè tám, kàd lietùviai, čià pasislė̃pę, šáudytų sàvo strėlėmìs į̃ neàtmušamus príešus, kurių̃ pulkaĩ, nesuskaĩtomi kaĩp žizdraĩ priẽ jū́ros, púola bajõrų pìlį.
 Collapse All
šiañdien -- adverb; <šiañdien> today -- today
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- its
plyšiúotos -- adjective; nominative plural feminine of <plyšiúotas, plyšiúota> fissured, cracked -- fissured
síenos -- noun, feminine; nominative plural of <síena> wall -- walls
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- (are) not
tám -- adverb; <tám> thereto -- there for
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
lietùviai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <lietùvis> Lithuanian -- Lithuanians
čià -- adverb; <čià> here -- here
pasislė̃pę -- verb; nominative plural masculine of preterit participle active reflexive of <pasislė̃pti, pasìslepia, pasìslėpė> hidden -- hidden
šáudytų -- verb; 3rd person subjunctive of <šáudyti, šáudo, šáudė> shoot -- would shoot
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- their
strėlėmìs -- noun, feminine; instrumental plural of <strėlė̃> arrow -- arrows
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- at
neàtmušamus -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; accusative plural masculine of present participle passive of <atmùšti, àtmuša, àtmušė> repulse, repel -- unstoppable
príešus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <príešas> enemy -- enemies
kurių̃ -- conjunction; genitive plural masculine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- whose
pulkaĩ -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <pul̃kas> regiment -- regiments
nesuskaĩtomi -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; nominative plural masculine of present participle passive of <suskaitýti, suskaĩto, suskaĩtė> countless -- countless
kaĩp -- conjunction; <kaĩp> as, like -- as
žizdraĩ -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <žìzdras> grain -- the grains (of sand)
priẽ -- preposition; <priẽ> at -- at
jū́ros -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <jū́ra> sea -- the seashore
púola -- verb; 3rd person present of <pùlti, púola, púolė> attack -- attack
bajõrų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <bajõras> boyar -- the boyars'
pìlį -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <pilìs> castle -- castle

Taĩp, kitadõs čià tikrõs piliẽs bū́ta.
 Collapse All
taĩp -- particle; <taĩp> so, therefore -- yes
kitadõs -- adverb; <kitadõs> once, sometime -- at one time
čià -- adverb; <čià> here -- here
tikrõs -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <tìkras, tikrà> genuine -- real
piliẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <pilìs> castle -- a castle
bū́ta -- verb; neuter of preterit participle passive of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- there was

Bèt, ámžiams sleñkant, ir̃ griū̃vančioji pilìs lìko bè prasmė̃s.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
ámžiams -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <ámžius> century -- centuries
sleñkant -- verb; present gerund(ive) of <sliñkti, sleñka, sliñko> pass, slip -- slipping by
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- even
griū̃vančioji -- verb; nominative singular feminine of present definite participle active of <griū́ti, griū̃va, griùvo> crumble -- crumbling
pilìs -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <pilìs> castle -- the castle
lìko -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <lìkti, líeka, lìko> remain -- remained
bè -- preposition; <bè> before, without -- without
prasmė̃s -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <prasmė̃> sense, meaning -- meaning

Ir̃ víenas sumanùs Šimoniũ prótėvių pastãtė čionaĩ tvìrtus sáu, sàvo vaikáms ir̃ vaikũ vaikáms namùs, kuriuõs apliñkiniai bū̃rai rū́mais pràminė.
 Collapse All
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
víenas -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <víenas, vienà> alone, each -- one
sumanùs -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <sumanùs, sumanì> clever -- clever
Šimoniũ -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Šimónis> Simonis -- from among Simonis'
prótėvių -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <prótėvis> ancestor -- ancestors
pastãtė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <pastatýti, pastãto, pastãtė> build -- built
čionaĩ -- adverb; <čionaĩ> here -- here
tvìrtus -- adjective; accusative plural masculine of <tvìrtas, tvirtà> solid, strong -- solid
sáu -- pronoun; dative of <savę̃s> oneself, itself -- for himself
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- his
vaikáms -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <vaĩkas> child -- for children
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
vaikũ -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <vaĩkas> child -- children's
vaikáms -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <vaĩkas> child -- for children
namùs -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <namaĩ> house -- house
kuriuõs -- pronoun; accusative plural masculine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- which
apliñkiniai -- adjective; nominative plural masculine of <apliñkinis, apliñkinė> neighboring -- neighboring
bū̃rai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <bū̃ras> peasant -- peasants
rū́mais -- noun, masculine; instrumental plural of <rū́mai> palace -- a palace
pràminė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <pramiñti, pràmena, pràminė> call, name -- called

Visàs nereikalìngas kampúotas síenas ansaĩ prótėvis nugrióvė.
 Collapse All
visàs -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <vìsas, visà> all -- all
nereikalìngas -- negative particle; <ne> not + adjective; accusative plural feminine of <reikalìngas, reikalìnga> necessary -- unnecessary
kampúotas -- adjective; accusative plural feminine of <kampúotas, kampúota> awkward -- awkward
síenas -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <síena> wall -- the walls
ansaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <anàs, anà> that -- that
prótėvis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <prótėvis> ancestor -- ancestor
nugrióvė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <nugriáuti, nugriáuna, nugrióvė> destroy -- destroyed

Tìk bókštas pasilìko, nórs jõ taip jaũ nebereikė́jo.
 Collapse All
tìk -- particle; <tìk> only -- only
bókštas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <bókštas> tower -- the tower
pasilìko -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <pasilìkti, pasiliẽka, pasilìko> remain -- remained
nórs -- conjunction; <nórs> although -- although
jõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
taip jaũ -- adverb; <taip jaũ> also -- also
nebereikė́jo -- negative particle; <nebe> not any more + verb; 3rd person preterit of <reikė́ti, reĩkia, reikė́jo> need -- was unnecessary

Bèt bókštas ir̃ šiañdien dár nežìno, kàd jìs nebereikalìngas.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
bókštas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <bókštas> tower -- the tower
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- even
šiañdien -- adverb; <šiañdien> today -- today
dár -- adverb; <dár> even, still -- yet
nežìno -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person present of <žinóti, žìno, žinójo> know -- doesn't realize
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
nebereikalìngas -- negative particle; <nebe> not any more + adjective; nominative singular masculine of <reikalìngas, reikalìnga> necessary -- is not necessary

Jìs dár, mandìng, nesuprañta dabartiẽs.
 Collapse All
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
dár -- adverb; <dár> even, still -- still
mandìng -- particle; <mandìng> seem -- (it) seems
nesuprañta -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person present of <supràsti, suprañta, suprãto> understand -- doesn't understand
dabartiẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <dabartìs> present -- the present

Jìs dár vis tebegyvẽna atsiminìmais ir̃ kaži kõ lýg láukia.
 Collapse All
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
dár vis -- adverb; <dár vis> even, still -- even
tebegyvẽna -- verb; 3rd person present of <tebegyvénti, tebegyvẽna, tebegyvẽno> still live -- is still living
atsiminìmais -- noun, masculine; instrumental plural reflexive of <atsiminìmai> memories -- with memories
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
kaži kõ -- pronoun; genitive of <kaži kõ> something -- for something
lýg -- conjunction; <lýg> as, like -- as if
láukia -- verb; 3rd person present of <láukti, láukia, láukė> expect, wait -- is waiting

Nè láisvės kokiõs.
 Collapse All
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
láisvės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <láisvė> freedom -- freedom
kokiõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <kóks, kokià> any, some -- some kind of

Jìs visái yrà užmir̃šęs, kàd paskutìnė kadáise bùvusi kruvinà kovà baĩgėsi lietùvių nenáudai, ir̃ šiañdien jiẽ gyvẽna svetimõj ponỹstėj.
 Collapse All
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
visái -- adverb; <visái> completely, totally -- completely
yrà -- verb; 3rd person present of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- ...
užmir̃šęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <užmir̃šti, užmir̃šta, užmir̃šo> forget -- has forgotten
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
paskutìnė -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <paskutìnis, paskutìnė> last, final -- last
kadáise -- adverb; <kadáise> once, sometime -- in the past
bùvusi -- verb; nominative singular feminine of preterit participle active of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- (which) took place
kruvinà -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <krùvinas, kruvinà> bloody -- bloody
kovà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <kovà> battle, struggle -- the battle
baĩgėsi -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <baĩgtis, baĩgiasi, baĩgėsi> end -- ended
lietùvių -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <lietùvis> Lithuanian -- of the Lithuanians
nenáudai -- noun, feminine; dative singular of <nenaudà> disadvantage -- to the disadvantage
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
šiañdien -- adverb; <šiañdien> today -- now
jiẽ -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- they
gyvẽna -- verb; 3rd person present of <gyvénti, gyvẽna, gyvẽno> live -- live
svetimõj -- adjective; locative singular feminine of <svẽtimas, svetimà> foreign -- foreign
ponỹstėj -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <ponỹstė> kingdom, country -- in a country

Tiesà, jìs daũg kãro gaisrų̃ mãtęs, daũg kãro šauksmų̃ girdė́jęs, ir̃ tõ jìs neužmir̃šęs.
 Collapse All
tiesà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <tiesà> truth -- true
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
daũg -- adverb; <daũg> many, much -- many
kãro -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kãras> war -- of war
gaisrų̃ -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <gaĩsras> conflagration, fire -- conflagrations
mãtęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <matýti, mãto, mãtė> see -- has seen
daũg -- adverb; <daũg> many, much -- many
kãro -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kãras> war -- of war
šauksmų̃ -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <šaũksmas> call, cry -- calls
girdė́jęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <girdė́ti, gir̃di, girdė́jo> hear -- has heard
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
tõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
neužmir̃šęs -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <užmir̃šti, užmir̃šta, užmir̃šo> forget -- has not forgotten

Todė̃l jìs visadà dár pasireñgęs atmùšti kažkókį príešą, nórintį užpùlti Líetuvą.
 Collapse All
todė̃l -- adverb; <todė̃l> therefore -- therefore
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
visadà -- adverb; <visadà> always -- always
dár -- adverb; <dár> even, still -- still
pasireñgęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active reflexive of <pasireñgti, pasireñgia, pasìrengė> prepare -- is prepared
atmùšti -- verb; infinitive of <atmùšti, àtmuša, àtmušė> repulse, repel -- to repulse
kažkókį -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <kažkóks, kažkokià> some -- whatever
príešą -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <príešas> enemy -- enemy
nórintį -- verb; accusative singular masculine of present participle active of <norė́ti, nóri, norė́jo> want -- (which)wants
užpùlti -- verb; infinitive of <užpùlti, užpúola, užpúolė> attack -- to attack
Líetuvą -- proper noun, feminine; accusative singular of <Lietuvà> Lithuania -- Lithuania

Juokìngas tàs sẽnis bókštas.
 Collapse All
juokìngas -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <juokìngas, juokìnga> comical -- is comical
tàs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
sẽnis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <sẽnis> old man -- old man
bókštas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <bókštas> tower -- tower

Jìs nė̃ pàts nebežìno, kàd tiẽ plyšiaĩ, kur̃ kitadõs lietùvių šaudỹklės kýšojo, šiañdien nèt labaĩ padidė́ję.
 Collapse All
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
nė̃ -- particle; <nė̃> even -- even
pàts -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <pàts, patì> itself -- itself
nebežìno -- negative particle; <nebe> not any more + verb; 3rd person present of <žinóti, žìno, žinójo> know -- doesn't know
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
tiẽ -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- those
plyšiaĩ -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <plyšỹs> fissure, cleft -- fissures
kur̃ -- adverb; <kur̃> where -- where
kitadõs -- adverb; <kitadõs> once, sometime -- once
lietùvių -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <lietùvis> Lithuanian -- of Lithuanians
šaudỹklės -- noun, feminine; nominative plural of <šaudỹklė> gun -- guns
kýšojo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <kýšoti, kýšo, kýšojo> stick out -- stuck out
šiañdien -- adverb; <šiañdien> today -- today
nèt -- particle; <nèt> even -- even
labaĩ -- adverb; <labaĩ> very much -- much
padidė́ję -- verb; nominative plural masculine of preterit participle active of <padidė́ti, padidė́ja, padidė́jo> increase -- have increased

Todė̃l jìs kar̃tais atródo lýg bedañtis senẽlis.
 Collapse All
todė̃l -- adverb; <todė̃l> therefore -- therefore
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- it
kar̃tais -- adverb; <kar̃tais> sometimes -- sometimes
atródo -- verb; 3rd person present of <atródyti, atródo, atródė> look -- looks
lýg -- conjunction; <lýg> as, like -- like
bedañtis -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <bedañtis, bedañtė> toothless -- toothless
senẽlis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <senẽlis> old man -- an old man

Vė́jai švil̃pia ir̃ ū́bauja prõ anuõs plyšiùs, gaúdydami víenas kìtą.
 Collapse All
vė́jai -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <vė́jas> wind -- the winds
švil̃pia -- verb; 3rd person present of <švil̃pti, švil̃pia, švil̃pė> whistle -- whistle
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
ū́bauja -- verb; 3rd person present of <ū́bauti, ū́bauja, ū́bavo> hoot -- howl
prõ -- preposition; <prõ> through -- through
anuõs -- pronoun; accusative plural masculine of <anàs, anà> that -- those
plyšiùs -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <plyšỹs> fissure, cleft -- fissures
gaúdydami -- verb; plural masculine of half participle of <gáudyti, gáudo, gáudė> chase -- chasing
víenas -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <víenas, vienà> alone, each -- each
kìtą -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <kìtas, kità> other -- other

Õ taĩ gir̃disi lýg kàd sẽnis švepliótų.
 Collapse All
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- but
taĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- it
gir̃disi -- verb; 3rd person present reflexive of <girdė́tis, gir̃disi, girdė́josi> be heard -- sounds
lýg -- conjunction; <lýg> as, like -- like
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- ...
sẽnis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <sẽnis> old man -- an old man
švepliótų -- verb; 3rd person subjunctive of <šveplióti, švepliója, švepliójo> lisp -- would lisp

Lesson Text
Šiañdien jaũ niẽkam nebereĩkia tõ bókšto sargýbos. Šiañdien jõ plyšiúotos síenos nè tám, kàd lietùviai, čià pasislė̃pę, šáudytų sàvo strėlėmìs į̃ neàtmušamus príešus, kurių̃ pulkaĩ, nesuskaĩtomi kaĩp žizdraĩ priẽ jū́ros, púola bajõrų pìlį. Taĩp, kitadõs čià tikrõs piliẽs bū́ta. Bèt, ámžiams sleñkant, ir̃ griū̃vančioji pilìs lìko bè prasmė̃s. Ir̃ víenas sumanùs Šimoniũ prótėvių pastãtė čionaĩ tvìrtus sáu, sàvo vaikáms ir̃ vaikũ vaikáms namùs, kuriuõs apliñkiniai bū̃rai rū́mais pràminė. Visàs nereikalìngas kampúotas síenas ansaĩ prótėvis nugrióvė. Tìk bókštas pasilìko, nórs jõ taip jaũ nebereikė́jo. Bèt bókštas ir̃ šiañdien dár nežìno, kàd jìs nebereikalìngas. Jìs dár, mandìng, nesuprañta dabartiẽs. Jìs dár vis tebegyvẽna atsiminìmais ir̃ kaži kõ lýg láukia. Nè láisvės kokiõs. Jìs visái yrà užmir̃šęs, kàd paskutìnė kadáise bùvusi kruvinà kovà baĩgėsi lietùvių nenáudai, ir̃ šiañdien jiẽ gyvẽna svetimõj ponỹstėj. Tiesà, jìs daũg kãro gaisrų̃ mãtęs, daũg kãro šauksmų̃ girdė́jęs, ir̃ tõ jìs neužmir̃šęs. Todė̃l jìs visadà dár pasireñgęs atmùšti kažkókį príešą, nórintį užpùlti Líetuvą. Juokìngas tàs sẽnis bókštas. Jìs nė̃ pàts nebežìno, kàd tiẽ plyšiaĩ, kur̃ kitadõs lietùvių šaudỹklės kýšojo, šiañdien nèt labaĩ padidė́ję. Todė̃l jìs kar̃tais atródo lýg bedañtis senẽlis. Vė́jai švil̃pia ir̃ ū́bauja prõ anuõs plyšiùs, gaúdydami víenas kìtą. Õ taĩ gir̃disi lýg kàd sẽnis švepliótų.
Translation
Today nobody needs the protection of that tower any more. Today its fissured walls are not there for Lithuanians, who, hidden here, could shoot their arrows at unstoppable enemies whose regiments, countless as the grains of sand at the seashore, attack the boyars' castle. Yes, at one time there was surely a real castle here. But in the course of centuries even the crumbling castle remained without meaning. And one clever person from among Simonis' ancestors built for himself, his children and his children's children a solid house, which the neighboring peasants called a palace. This ancestor destroyed all the unnecessary awkward walls.
Only the tower remained, although that was also unnecessary. But the tower even today doesn't realize that it is no longer necessary. It seems that it still doesn't understand the present. It is still living with its memories and seems to be waiting for something. Not some kind of freedom. It has completely forgotten that the last bloody battle ended to the disadvantage of the Lithuanians and now they live in a foreign country. True, it has seen many conflagrations of war, has heard the clamor of war and has not forgotten this. Therefore it is always prepared to repulse whatever enemy wants to attack Lithuania.
That senile old man tower is comical. It doesn't know itself that those fissures where Lithuanian guns once stuck out have become much bigger today. Therefore it sometimes looks like a toothless old man. Chasing each other the winds whistle and howl through these fissures. But it sounds like a lisping old man.
Grammar
16 The Accent Classes of the Nouns
16.1 The Third Accent Class
The third accent class comprises nouns that, in the dative plural, have their stress on the ending while in the accusative plural the stress may fall on any syllable of their stem. When the stress falls on the penultimate syllable, it is always acute; when the stress falls on any other syllable of the stem before penultimate, it may be acute, circumflex, or the syllable may be short, e.g., acc.sg. délną 'palm (of the hand)'; dẽbesį 'cloud'; dóbilą 'clover'; ùždavinį 'task'.

In trisyllabic and quadrisyllabic nouns, the play of stress is ordinarily between the initial syllable and the final syllable. If the stress on the initial syllable is the acute, these nouns are labelled 3a for trisyllabic and 34a for quadrisyllabic. If the stress on the initial syllable is circumflex or the syllable is short, they are labelled 3b and 34b respectively, e.g., acc.sg. kẽpalą 3b 'loaf'; žìburį 3b; tráukinį 3a; ãpdangalą 34b 'cover'; láiškanešį 34a 'postman'; pìktadarį 'malefactor' 34b.

Examples of the third accent class are given below:

Nom sg	 	délnas 'palm'	 	aikštė̃ 'square'	 	debesìs 'cloud'
Gen sg	 	délno	 	aikštė̃s	 	debesiẽs
Dat sg	 	délnui	 	áikštei	 	dẽbesiui
Acc sg	 	délną	 	áikštę	 	dẽbesį
Inst sg	 	délnu	 	áikšte	 	debesimì
 	 	 	 	 	 	debesim̃
Loc sg	 	delnè	 	aikštėjè	 	debesyjè
 	 	 	 	aikštė̃j	 	debesỹ
Voc sg	 	délne	 	áikšte	 	debesiẽ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	delnaĩ	 	áikštės	 	dẽbesys
Gen pl	 	delnų̃	 	aikščių̃	 	debesų̃
Dat pl	 	delnáms	 	aikštė́ms	 	debesìms
 	 	delnám	 	aikštė́m	 	debesìm
Acc pl	 	délnus	 	áikštes	 	dẽbesis
Inst pl	 	delnaĩs	 	aikštėmìs	 	debesimìs
 	 	 	 	aikštė̃m	 	debesim̃
Loc pl	 	delnuosè	 	aikštėsè	 	debesysè
 	 	delnuõs	 	 	 	 
Voc pl	 	delnaĩ	 	áikštės	 	dẽbesys
16.2 The Fourth Accent Class
The fourth accent class comprises nouns that, in the dative and accusative plural, have their stress on the ending. In their paradigm the stress alternates between the ending and the penultimate syllable, which is either short or has the circumflex intonation. The fourth accent class seems to be a kind of combination of the second and third accent classes. In any particular case if the stress is required on the inflectional syllable by either the rules of the second or the third accent class, then the stress will be on the inflectional syllable. In other words the stress is on the case ending unless a stem stress is demanded for that same case in both the second and third accent classes. The paradigms for the nouns of the fourth accent class are given bellow. In this paradigm the noun viršùs 'top' is mostly used as singularia tantum and the noun piẽtūs 'dinner', 'south' is pluralia tantum.

Nom sg	 	nãmas 'house'	 	pušìs 'pine'	 	viršùs 'top'
Gen sg	 	nãmo	 	pušiẽs	 	viršaũs
Dat sg	 	nãmui	 	pùšiai	 	vir̃šui
Acc sg	 	nãmą	 	pùšį	 	vir̃šų
Inst sg	 	namù	 	pušimì	 	viršumì
 	 	 	 	pušim̃	 	viršum̃
Loc sg	 	namè	 	pušyjè	 	viršujè
 	 	 	 	pušỹ	 	viršùj
Voc sg	 	nãme	 	pušiẽ	 	viršaũ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	namaĩ	 	pùšys	 	piẽtūs 'dinner', 'south'
Gen pl	 	namų̃	 	pušų̃	 	pietų̃
Dat pl	 	namáms	 	pušìms	 	pietùms
 	 	namám	 	pušìm	 	pietùm
Acc pl	 	namùs	 	pušìs	 	pietùs
Inst pl	 	namaĩs	 	pušimìs	 	pietumìs
 	 	 	 	pušim̃	 	pietum̃
Loc pl	 	namuosè	 	pušysè	 	pietuosè
 	 	namuõs	 	 	 	pietuõs
Voc pl	 	namaĩ	 	pùšys	 	 
17 Numerals
Numerals are inflected for case, partly for gender and number. Some numerals are similar to nouns, others to adjectives. There are two main groups of numerals: cardinal and ordinal numerals. Cardinal numerals are subdivided into several groups: basic numerals, plural (pluralia tantum) numerals, collective numerals and fractions. According to their structure numerals are simple, derived, compound or composite (multiword) numerals.

17.1 Basic Numerals
The following numerals from one to nine are simple numerals:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	víenas 'one'	 	vienà
 	 	dù 'two'	 	dvì
 	 	trỹs 'three'	 	trỹs
 	 	keturì 'four'	 	kẽturios
 	 	penkì 'five'	 	peñkios
 	 	šešì 'six'	 	šẽšios
 	 	septynì 'seven'	 	septýnios
 	 	aštuonì 'eight'	 	aštúonios
 	 	devynì 'nine'	 	devýnios
The number víenas is declined like a regular first declension adjective and agrees in case, number and gender with the noun which it modifies, e.g., Jìs tùri tìk víeną dvìratį 'He has only one bicycle'. The number trỹs is inflected for gender only in the locative, e.g., trijuosè viẽšbučiuose 'in three hotels' vs trijosè kavìnėse 'in three cafes'.

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	 
Nom	 	dù 'two'	 	dvì	 	trỹs	 	'three'	 	keturì 'four'	 	kẽturios
Gen	 	dviejũ*	 	dviejũ*	 	trijų̃	 	keturių̃	 	keturių̃	 	 
Dat	 	dvíem	 	dvíem	 	trìms	 	keturíems	 	keturióms	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	trìm	 	keturíem	 	keturióm	 	 
Acc	 	dù	 	dvì	 	trìs	 	kẽturis	 	kẽturias	 	 
Inst	 	dviẽm	 	dviẽm	 	trimìs	 	keturiaĩs	 	keturiomìs	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	trim̃	 	 	 	keturiõm	 	 
Loc	 	dviejuosè	 	dviejosè	 	trijuosè	 	keturiuosè	 	keturiosè	 	 
 	 	dviejuõs	 	 	 	 	 	keturiuõs	 	 	 	 
 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom	 	penkì 'five'	 	peñkios	 	septynì 'seven'	 	septýnios
Gen	 	penkių̃	 	penkių̃	 	septynių̃	 	septynių̃
Dat	 	penkíems	 	penkióms	 	septyníems	 	septynióms
 	 	penkíem	 	penkióm	 	septyníem	 	septynióm
Acc	 	penkìs	 	penkiàs	 	septýnis	 	septýnias
Inst	 	penkiaĩs	 	penkiomìs	 	septyniaĩs	 	septyniomìs
 	 	 	 	penkiõm	 	 	 	septyniõm
Loc	 	penkiuosè	 	penkiosè	 	septyniuosè	 	septyniosè
 	 	penkiuõs	 	 	 	septyniuõs	 	 
The declension of penkì and septynì differs from keturì only by virtue of the fact that they belong to different accent classes. Šešì is declined and accented like penkì, and aštuonì and devynì like septynì.

The numerals from two to nine agree with the word they modify in case and gender:

Svar̃stymas bùvo atidė́tas keturióms dienóms
'A discussion was delayed for four days'.
Dešimtìs 'ten'is declined like a regular third declension noun of accent class 3b, however, it is used rarely. The indeclinable form dẽšimt 'ten' is used instead.

Numbers from eleven to nineteen are denoted by compound numerals. They are built by adding -lika (derived historically from the verb lìkti 'remain') to simple numerals from one to nine:

vienúolika 'eleven';
dvýlika 'twelve';
trýlika 'thirteen';
keturiólika 'fourteen';
penkiólika 'fifteen';
šešiólika 'sixteen;
septyniólika 'seventeen';
aštuoniólika 'eighteen';
devyniólika 'nineteen'.
They are not inflected for gender, but they are declined like a regular second declension nouns of the first accent class (cf: síela, 'soul') except that the accusative is like the nominative: vienúolika.

Tens are indicated by compound numerals, the first constituent of which coincides with the accusative form of simple feminine numerals, e.g., dvi-, tris-, keturias-, etc. and the second constituent is the numeral dešimt:

dvìdešimt 'twenty';
trìsdešimt 'thirty';
kẽturiasdešimt 'fourty';
peñkiasdešimt 'fifty';
šẽšiasdešimt 'sixty';
septýniasdešimt 'seventy';
aštúoniasdešimt 'eighty';
devýniasdešimt 'ninety'.
These numerals are declined like dešimtìs. However, uninflected forms are used more often, e.g.:

Bè dvìdešimt (or gen. dvidešimtiẽs) vadovė̃lių neišsiver̃sime
'We cannot do without twenty text-books'.
Šim̃tas 'hundred' is declined like a regular first declension noun of the fourth accent class (cf: na~mas 'house').

Tū́kstantis 'thousand' is declined like a regular first declension noun of the first accent class (cf: brólis 'brother').

Milijõnas 'million' is declined like a regular first declension noun of the second accent class (cf: pir̃štas 'finger').

Numerals from 10 to 19, numerals indicating tens (20-90), also šim̃tas 'hundred', tū́kstantis 'thousand', milijõnas, 'million', milijárdas 'billion' require that the noun quantified be in the genitive plural. They are used as nouns, e.g.:

Šešiólika strėlių̃ 'sixteen arrows';
peñkiasdešimt pilių̃ 'fifty castles';
šim̃tas vaikų̃ 'a hundred children';
tū́kstantis príešų 'a thousand enemies';
milijõnai vabzdžių̃ 'millions of insects';
milijárdas žvaigždžių̃ 'a billion stars'.
In declining multi-word numerals, we decline all the components except for the uninflected ones, e.g., nom. dù šimtaĩ peñkiasdešimt devynì; gen. dviejų̃ šimtų̃ peñkiasdešimt devynių̃; dat. dvíem šimtáms peñkiasdešimt devyníems, etc.

17.2 Plural Numerals
Those numerals which are reserved for use with nouns which have a plural form but a singular meaning are as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	vienerì mẽtai 'one year'	 	víenerios dùrys 'one door'
 	 	vienì mẽtai 'one year'	 	víenos dùrys 'one door'
 	 	dvejì piẽtūs 'two dinners'	 	dvẽjos skyrýbos 'two divorces'
 	 	trejì var̃tai 'three gates';	 	trẽjos rõgės 'three sledges'
 	 	ketverì akiniaĩ 'four eye glasses'	 	kẽtverios žìrklės 'four pairs of scissors'
 	 	penkerì rinkìmai 'five elections'	 	peñkerios vestùvės 'five weddings'
 	 	šešerì neštùvai 'six stretchers'	 	šẽšerios láidotuvės 'six funerals'
 	 	septynerì kailiniaĩ 'seven fur coats'	 	septýnerios kélnės 'seven pairs of trousers'
 	 	aštuonerì marškiniaĩ 'eight shirts'	 	aštúonerios imtỹnės 'eight wrestling matches'
 	 	devynerì pakiñktai 'nine harnesses'	 	devýnerios muštỹnės 'nine fights'
The plural number vienerì, vienerios 'one' is a new form in Lithuanian. Also the plural forms of the cardinal numbers vienì, víenos are used with pluralia tantum. These numerals are formed by adding the suffixes -eji, -ejos or -eri, -erios to a simple cardinal numerals.

Numerals of this group are declined like the adjectives of the second declension (cf: žãlias, žalià 'green'):

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom	 	vienerì 'one'	 	víenerios	 	dvejì 'two'	 	dvẽjos
Gen	 	vienerių̃	 	vienerių̃	 	dvejų̃	 	dvejų̃
Dat	 	vieneríems	 	vienerióms	 	dvejíems	 	dvejóms
 	 	vieneríem	 	vienerióm	 	dvejíem	 	dvejóm
Acc	 	víenerius	 	víenerias	 	dvejùs	 	dvejàs
Inst	 	vieneriaĩs	 	vieneriomìs	 	dvejaĩs	 	dvejomìs
 	 	 	 	vieneriõm	 	 	 	dvejõm
Loc	 	vieneriuosè	 	vieneriosè	 	dvejuosè	 	dvejosè
 	 	vieneriuõs	 	 	 	dvejuõs	 	 
Dvejì and trejì are accented like the ajectives of the fourth accent class, whereas all the others are accented like the adjectives of the third accent class.

17.3 Collective Numerals
There are eight collective numerals: dvẽjetas 'two', trẽjetas 'three', kẽtvertas 'four', peñketas 'five', šẽšetas 'six', septýnetas 'seven', aštúonetas 'eight', devýnetas 'nine'. They are formed by adding the suffixes -etas or -tas (kẽtvertas 'four') to a basic numeral or plural numerals. Víenetas 'one' does not denote number so it cannot be regarded as a collective numeral. It is used as a noun, e.g.:

Lìtas yrà Lietuvõs pinigìnis víenetas
'The litas is the basic unit of currency in Lithuania'.
Other collective numerals (mostly their diminutive forms) can also be used as nouns:

Stártinis penketùkas jaũ bùvo pasiruõšęs žaĩsti
'The starting line-up of five (players) was ready to play'.
These numerals belong to accent class one and are declined like regular first declension nouns (cf: výras).

The collective numerals show that the objects under consideration are to be taken as a group:

Užtrùksiu tik trẽjetą dienų̃ 'I will be delayed only for three days'.
Šẽšetas výrų mėgìno įnèšti pianìną į̃ vìdų '(A group of) six men were trying to bring a piano inside'.
Ligónis nesugebė́jo žeñgti nė̃ kẽtverto žiñgsnių 'The patient was not able to take even four steps'.
The noun quantified by these collective numerals is always in the genitive plural.

18 Adjective Inflection
18.1 The Definite Adjectives
The forms of the definite adjective are mainly obtained by adding the appropriate case of the third person pronoun to the indefinite adjective:

naũjas + jìs 'new' + 'he' = naujàsis 'new';
naujà + jì 'new' + 'she' = naujóji 'new'.
But there are some changes in the vowels in their declension:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	žaliàsis 'green'	 	žalióji	 	saldùsis 'sweet'	 	saldžióji
Gen sg	 	žãliojo	 	žaliõsios	 	sáldžiojo	 	saldžiõsios
Dat sg	 	žaliájam	 	žãliajai	 	saldžiájam	 	sáldžiajai
Acc sg	 	žãliąjį	 	žãliąją	 	sáldųjį	 	sáldžiąją
Inst sg	 	žaliúoju	 	žalią́ja	 	saldžiúoju	 	saldžią́ja
Loc sg	 	žaliãjam(e)	 	žaliõjoj(e)	 	saldžiãjam(e)	 	saldžiõjoj(e)
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom sg	 	žalíeji	 	žãliosios	 	saldíeji	 	sáldžiosios
Gen sg	 	žalių̃jų	 	žalių̃jų	 	saldžių̃jų	 	saldžių̃jų
Dat sg	 	žalíesiem(s)	 	žaliósiom(s)	 	saldíesiem(s)	 	saldžiósiom(s)
Acc sg	 	žaliúosius	 	žalią́sias	 	saldžiúosius	 	saldžią́sias
Inst sg	 	žaliaĩsiais	 	žaliõsiom(is)	 	saldžiaĩsiais	 	saldžiõsiom(is)
Loc sg	 	žaliuõsiuos(e)	 	žaliõsiose	 	saldžiuõsiuos(e)	 	saldžiõsiose
Definite forms are not formed from the third declension adjectives (e.g., auksìnis 'golden'), but they can be formed from comparative and superlative adjectives: naujesnỹsis, naujesnióji 'newer'; naujáusiasis, naujáusioji 'newest'.

Some pronouns and numerals and many participles also have definite forms, e.g., tasaĩ bókštas 'that tower'; pirmóji kovà 'the first battle'; griū̃vančioji pilìs 'the crumbling castle'.

The definite form of the adjective is used to point out some particular object in a group of similar objects:

Añt stãlo gùli kẽletas įvairių̃ spalvų̃ pieštùkų. 'There are some pencils of different colors on the desk.'
Kuriõ tù norė́tum? 'Which one would you like?'
Padúok mán (tą̃) žãliąjį. 'Give me the green one.'
In most cases the English adjective plus one construction could be the best rendered by the definite adjective in Lithuanian.

The definite form of the adjective may also impart a generic meaning of the noun, because it denotes a permanent characteristic. Thus pilkà žąsìs merely means 'a gray goose', whereas pilkóji žąsìs is the variety the gray goose (Latin Anser anser). These forms are common in various terms where they cannot be replaced in most cases with the indefinite forms, e.g., greitàsis traukinỹs 'the fast train' and greĩtas traukinỹs 'a fast train'.

Definite forms are used to form proper names:

Juodóji jū́ra 'The Black sea';
Baltíeji rū́mai 'The White House';
Výtautas Didỹsis 'Vytautas the Great'.
In many cases the definite adjectives differ very little from the simple adjectives. The definite adjectives merely emphasize more the attributive characteristics of the nouns. Thus, their use can be subjective, e.g.:

Mán skaũda dẽšinę (dešinią́ją) ãkį
'My right eye aches'.
Definite adjectives can be used as substantives of the sentence:

Žalíeji užtvė́rė autostrãdą 'The Greens blocked the highway'.
Už vagỹstę jìs patẽko į̃ šáltąją 'He was locked up in prison (lit. 'the cold one') for the theft'.
Dešiniéji pralaimė̃s rinkimùs 'The right-wingers will lose the election'.
18.2 Comparision of Adjectives
There are three basic degrees of comparision in Lithuanian just as in English: the positive, the comparative, and the superlative.

The positive adjectival forms do not refer to any difference in the degree of a quality.

The comparative degree is formed by dropping the endings (-(i)as, -us) of the masculine nominative singular of the adjective and adding -esnis (for masculine) or -esnė (for feminine), e.g., žalèsnis 'greener', žalèsnė; saldèsnis 'sweeter', saldèsnė. There is practically no comparative degree with the adjectives of the third declension (auksìnis 'golden', vilnõnis 'woolen').

The comparative adjectives are declined as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	gilèsnis 'deeper'	 	gilèsnė	 	didèsnis 'bigger'	 	didèsnė
Gen sg	 	gilèsnio	 	gilesnė̃s	 	didèsnio	 	didesnė̃s
Dat sg	 	gilesniám	 	gilèsnei	 	didesniám	 	didèsnei
Acc sg	 	gilèsnį	 	gilèsnę	 	didèsnį	 	didèsnę
Inst sg	 	gilesniù	 	gilesnè	 	didesniù	 	didesnè
Loc sg	 	gilesniamè	 	gilèsnėje	 	didesniamè	 	didèsnėje
 	 	gilesniam̃	 	gilèsnėj	 	didesniam̃	 	didèsnėj
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	gilesnì	 	gilèsnės	 	didesnì	 	didèsnės
Gen pl	 	gilesnių̃	 	gilesnių̃	 	didesnių̃	 	didesnių̃
Dat pl	 	gilesníems	 	gilesnė́ms	 	didesníems	 	didesnė́ms
 	 	gilesníem	 	gilesnė́m	 	didesníem	 	didesnė́m
Acc pl	 	gilesniùs	 	gilesnès	 	didesniùs	 	didesnès
Inst pl	 	gilesniaĩs	 	gilesnėmìs	 	didesniaĩs	 	didesnėmìs
 	 	 	 	gilesnė̃m	 	 	 	didesnė̃m
Loc pl	 	gilesniuosè	 	gilesnėsè	 	didesniuosè	 	didesnėsè
 	 	gilesniuõs	 	 	 	didesniuõs	 	 
There are some positive adjectives which are also declined according to this paradigm, e.g., dìdelis 'big', dìdelė; dešinỹs 'right', dešinė̃; kairỹs 'left', kairė̃. In the adjective dìdelis 'big' -elis is dropped before the addition of the comparative or supperlative endings -esnis, -iausias, e.g., didèsnis 'bigger', didžiáusias 'biggest'.

The comparative degree denotes that there is a greater degree of the quality in question in one object than in another. The concept "than" in most cases is expresed by negù, neĩ, with the following noun in the nominative case or ùž with the accusative case. Other expressions (kaĩp, nekaĩp) are rarer.

Tàvo mašinà naujèsnė negù màno (mašinà) 'Your car is newer than my car'.
Juodà dúona sveikèsnė ùž báltą (dúoną) 'Brown bread is more healthy than white bread'.
Mònikos výras turtingèsnis neĩ Sãros výras 'Monica's husband is richer than Sara's husband'.
The superlative degree is formed by dropping the -(i)as, -us of the masculine nominative singular of the adjective and adding -iausias, -iausia, e.g., žaliáusias, 'greenest' žaliáusia; saldžiáusias 'sweetest', saldžiáusia. If the stem ends in -d or -t these are replaced by -dž and -č respectively. They are declined like the adjectives of the first declension (cf: žãlias 'green'):

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	giliáusias 'deepest'	 	giliáusia	 	didžiáusias 'biggest'	 	didžiáusia
Gen sg	 	giliáusio	 	giliáusios	 	didžiáusio	 	didžiáusios
Dat sg	 	giliáusiam	 	giliáusiai	 	didžiáusiam	 	didžiáusiai
Acc sg	 	giliáusią	 	giliáusią	 	didžiáusią	 	didžiáusią
Inst sg	 	giliáusiu	 	giliáusia	 	didžiáusiu	 	didžiáusia
Loc sg	 	giliáusiam(e)	 	giliáusioj(e)	 	didžiáusiam(e)	 	didžiáusioj(e)
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	giliáusi	 	giliáusios	 	didžiáusi	 	didžiáusios
Gen pl	 	giliáusių	 	giliáusių	 	didžiáusių	 	didžiáusių
Dat pl	 	giliáusiem(s)	 	giliáusiom(s)	 	didžiáusiem(s)	 	didžiáusiom(s)
Acc pl	 	giliaúsius	 	giliaúsias	 	didžiáusius	 	didžiáusias
Inst pl	 	giliáusiais	 	giliáusiom(is)	 	didžiáusiais	 	didžiáusiomis
Loc pl	 	giliáusiuos(e)	 	giliáusiose	 	didžiáusiuos(e)	 	didžiáusiose
The superlative degree denotes the highest or greatest existing degree of the quality expressed by the adjective:

Šiuõ metù jìs yrà svarbiáusias žmogùs ìš visų̃ 'Now he is the most important man of all (people)'.
Atvỹksta jauniáusia duktė̃ 'The youngest daughter is coming'.
Pérduok jíems màno nuoširdžiáusius linkė́jimus 'Give them my warmest greetings'.
The neuter adjective has a comparative -iau and superlative -iausia, e.g., gražù 'beautiful', gražiaũ , gražiáusia; pìkta 'angry', pikčiaũ, pikčiáusia:

Šiañdien šilčiaũ neĩ vãkar 'Today is warmer than yesterday'.
Mán apmaudžiáusia dė̃l tõ pralaimė́jimo 'I am mostly annoyed because of that defeat'.
There is a degree which is somewhat stronger than the positive and weaker than the comparative. It is formed with the suffixes -ėlesnis, -ėlesnė, e.g., mažėlèsnis 'a little smaller' mažėlèsnė. Some other transitional stages are expressed by the prefixes apy- and po- or the suffix -okas, e.g., apýsunkis 'pretty hard', apýsunkė; apýnaujis` 'pretty new' apýnaujė; póminkštis 'pretty soft', póminkštė; didókas 'rather big', didóka.

19 The Participles, Half-participles, and Gerunds
Participles in Lithuanian are similar to participles in English and other languages. They are a variety of adjectives derived from verbs. In Lithuanian they are declined like adjectives and they can denote the characteristic of an object. They can possess definite forms. But, since they are formed from verbs, they also have verbal characteristics: they can denote action and are inflected for tense and can be active and passive. The reflexive forms are also an important verbal characteristic of the participles.

Participles can be used in the following four cases: (a) as modifiers (adjectival use); (b) in compound tenses; (c) in participial phrases; (d) in indirect discourse.

The special adverbial participles (half-participles) denote an action which is simultaneous with the action of the main verb.

Four indeclinable forms of active participles are traditionally called gerunds. They are formed by adding the same suffixes to the same stems as any other active participle. The main difference is the absence of case endings.

19.1 The Present Active Participles and Half-participles
The present active participles are formed by replacing the 3rd person endings -a, -i, -o with (a) the masculine nominative singular endings -ąs, -įs, -ąs or (b) the feminine nominative singular endings -anti, -inti, -anti, e.g.:

bė́ga '(he) runs': bėgã*s (in adjectival function bė́gantis), bė́ganti 'running';	 	 
mýli	 	'(he) loves': mylį̃s (in adjectival function mýlintis), mýlinti 'loving';
gýdo '(he) cures': gydą̃s (in adjectival function gýdantis), gýdanti 'curing'.	 	 
The present active participles are declined as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	bėgą̃s 'running'	 	bė́ganti
 	 	bė́gantis	 	 
Gen sg	 	bė́gančio	 	bė́gančios
Dat sg	 	bė́gančiam	 	bė́gančiai
Acc sg	 	bė́gantį	 	bė́gančią
Inst sg	 	bė́gančiu	 	bė́gančia
Loc sg	 	bė́gančiam(e)	 	bė́gančioj(e)
 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	bėgą̃	 	bė́gančios
 	 	bė́gantys	 	 
Gen pl	 	bė́gančių	 	bė́gančių
Dat pl	 	bė́gantiem(s)	 	bė́gančiom(s)
Acc pl	 	bė́gančius	 	bė́gančias
Inst pl	 	bė́gančiais	 	bė́gančiom(is)
Loc pl	 	bė́gančiuos(e)	 	bė́gančiose
The forms bė́gantis 'running', bė́gantys are used only in adjectival function, e.g., bė́gantis čiáupas 'running tap', bė́gantys čiáupai 'running taps'. Bėgą̃s čiáupas and bėgą̃ čiáupai would be uncommon in Modern Lithuanian.

In the nominative singular and plural the present active participles have a special form which is used in adverbial function. It is called in Lithuanian as the half-participle. Half-participles are formed by adding -damas, -dama to the infinitival stem, e.g.,

bė́g-ti 'to run': sg. bė́gdamas, bėgdamà;
mylė́-ti 'to love': sg. mylė́damas, mylė́dama.
These forms are inflected for gender and number and they agree with the subject of the sentence in gender and number, e.g.:

Vaĩkas bė́gdamas treñkėsi į̃ durìs
'The child struck the door while running'.
19.2 The Past Active Participle
The past active participle is formed by replacing the 3rd person simple preterit endings -o and -ė with (a) the masculine nominative singular -ęs or (b) the feminine nominative singular -usi, e.g.,

bė́go '(he) ran': bė́gęs, bė́gusi '(the one who) ran';
gýdė '(he) cured': gýdęs, gýdžiusi '(the one who) cured'.
A paradigm of the declension for the past active participles is given below:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	bė́gęs '(the one who) ran'	 	bė́gusi
Gen sg	 	bė́gusio	 	bė́gusios
Dat sg	 	bė́gusiam	 	bė́gusiai
Acc sg	 	bė́gusį	 	bė́gusią
Inst sg	 	bė́gusiu	 	bė́gusia
Loc sg	 	bė́gusiam(e)	 	gė́gusioj(e)
 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	bė́gę	 	bė́gusios
Gen pl	 	bė́gusių	 	bė́gusių
Dat pl	 	bė́gusiem(s)	 	bė́gusiom(s)
Acc pl	 	bė́gusius	 	bė́gusias
Inst pl	 	bė́gusiais	 	bė́gusiomis
Loc pl	 	bė́gusiuos(e)	 	bė́gusiose
19.3 The Frequentative Past Active Participle
The frequentative past active participle is formed by removing the 3rd person ending of the frequentative past tense, i.e. -o and adding the same endings as those used for the past active participle (see above), e.g.:

bė́gdavo '(he) used to run': bė́gdavęs, bė́gdavusi;
gýdydavo '(he) used to cure': gýdydavęs, gýdydavusi/.
This form is used rarely in Lithuanian. Examples are given below:

Vãsarą jiẽ važiúodavę priẽ jū́ros 'In summer they used to go to the sea'.
Àš prisìmenu geraĩ žmõgų, váikščiodavusį čià kasdiẽn 'I remember well the man who used to walk here every day'.
It is declined like the past active participle.

19.4 The Future Active Participle
The future active participle is formed by adding the same endings as those used for the present active participle (i.e. -ąs, -anti) to the future stem of the 2nd person singular, e.g.:

2nd sg.fut. bė́gsi 'you will run': bė́gsiąs, bė́gsianti;
2nd sg.fut. mylė́si 'you will love': mylė́siąs, mylė́sianti.
Since all of the present active participle endings begin with a vowel, the -si- denotes here merely palatalized -s-.

Future active participles are not used frequently in Lithuanian:

Rytój jiẽ vỹksiantys namõ
'Tomorrow they (maybe) will go home'.
These participles are declined like the present active participles.

19.5 The Gerunds
The gerunds are formed from the active participles by dropping the final -i of the feminine nominative singular forms, e.g.:

bė́ganti: bė́gant;
bė́gusi: bė́gus;
bė́gdavusi: bė́gdavus;
bė́gsianti: bė́gsiant.
They denote an action or situation which is accessory or incidental to the action of the main verb. Such forms are used rather than the adverbial participle or the past active participle to show that the subject of the concomitant action is not the same as that of the main verb, e.g.:

Bèt, ámžiams sleñkant, ir̃ griū̃vančioji pilìs lìko bè prasmė̃s 'But in the course of centuries even the crumbling castle remained without meaning'.
Išvýdus tókį vaĩzdą, jiems plaukaĩ pasišiáušė 'Having seen such a sight, their hair stood on end'.
The gerund can have not only an object (e.g., vaizdą 'sight'), but a subject too. Such a subject is put in the dative case (e.g., ámžiams 'centuries') and than we have what is known as a dative absolute construction.

20 Some Impersonal Constructions
Impersonal constructions can be formed with impersonal (subjectless) verbs. The impersonal verbs usually denote natural phenomena, e.g., témti 'to get dark', lynóti 'to drizzle', or person's physical or mental state, e.g., maũsti 'to ache', atródyti 'to seem'. These verbs cannot be combined with a subject expressed in nominative case. Such constructions may consist of a predicate alone or a predicate and other dependents (e.g., oblique cases, adverbials, infinitives):

Įdienójo 'It was broad daylight'.
Vaĩką pỹkina 'The child feels sick'.
Jám pasìsekė laimė́ti 'He succeeded in winning'.
Šiañdien jaũ niẽkam nebereĩkia tõ bókšto sargýbos 'Today nobody needs the protection of that tower any more'.
The logical subject of the verb nebereĩkia is in the dative case (niẽkam) and the logical object is in the genitive case (sargýbos).

Some of impersonal verbs denoting natural phenomena can take a tautological or cognate subject, e.g.:

Lietùs lỹja
(literally) 'Rain is raining'.
The neuter forms are commonly used with the verb bū́ti 'to be' in certain impersonal constructions:

Búvo káršta 'It was hot'.
Mán baĩsiai pìkta 'I feel extremely angry'.
Ligóniui sunkù sėdė́ti 'It is difficult for the patient to sit'.
Tòmui gaĩla sàvo draũgo 'Tomas is sorry for his friend'.
The present tense form of bū́ti 'to be' is usually omitted.

These forms may also be used with an infinitive of a verb occurring as a subject of certain constructions, e.g.:

Píeną sveĩka gérti 'It is healthy to drink milk'.
Nãmą sunkù statýti 'It is difficult to build a house'.
Another type of such a construction is also possible with the neuter adjective, although such a construction is to be considered an exception rather than the general rule. In such constructions the logical object of the infinitive is in the nominative case, e.g.:

Píenas sveĩka gérti 'Milk is healthy to drink'.
Nãmas sunkù statýti 'The house is difficult to built'.

Lesson 5: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
Juozas Tumas (1869-1933), known as Vaizgantas, was a well-known activist of the Catholic wing of the Lithuanian revival; he advocated the ideas of Lithuanian unity on the basis of Catholicism. This Lithuanian prose author, historian, and critic of literature took part in the founding and publication of several newspapers of national and Catholic orientation of that epoch. Almost every new work of a Lithuanian author was the object of his attention as a critic and reviewer. Vaizgantas had very strict requirements of artistry and language. He was more lenient with younger authors, trying to discern their emerging talent; therefore he is sometimes called 'the diamond hunter.' Although Vaizgantas' native Eastern Aukshtaitish dialect differed most of all from all other Lithuanian dialects, he tried to set an example for other people and to speak and write in the standard Lithuanian language, which was beginning to take root. However, in his literary works he did not avoid borrowings if they seemed to him to be more expressive than the Lithuanian words. In addition he used many dialect words and loved to create neologisms.

Vaizgantas' most popular work is his psychological tale Uncles and Aunts (i.e., wives of uncles). In it the author describes the way of life of the Lithuanian village. He reveals the rich and poetic internal world of the simple village man. 'Uncles' is a term denoting not only relatives, but also a person of a certain social class of the end of the XIXth and beginning of the XXth century in Lithuania. Brothers and sisters, recognizing the seniority of the oldest son to run the farm, remained unmarried and worked without recompense on the brother's farm. Their position was intermediate between that of a family member and a hired hand. Such are the basic protagonists of the story, viz. Mykolas and Severija, because of their gracious demeanor and poetic soul called by the diminutives Mykoliukas and Severiute. In the story their drama of love is described with great artistic force. Love for Severiute is the only real ray of light in the life of Mykoliukas, but being passive by nature and lacking will and ambition, he loses his beloved girl and makes peace with his fate. Distinguished by a firmer character and more energetic strength, his neighbor Rapolas Geise is successful in attracting Severija to his side and he marries her. At Severija's wedding Mykoliukas for the last time plays the little violin he has made until its strings break. In this story scenes of nature, which accompany all the experiences of the protagonists, are extremely important.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The selection given below from Uncles and Aunts tells of the meeting between Mykoliukas and Severiute in a blooming meadow near a marsh. Catching sight of the approaching Severiute, Mykoliukas stops pouring out the longing of his love with his home-made violin. They don't need any words to express their feelings. They both come together with the nature that surrounds them and speaks for them. The eloquent silence of their love is interrupted by the sudden, unexpected appearance of Geise.

In the excerpt we encounter the dual number of several pronouns jíemdviem, júodu, abùdu sė́dinčiu and one participle abùdu sė́dinčiu. Here we also encounter some relatively rarely used future gerunds, which form complicated constructions characteristic of the older language and which in modern Lithuanian are replaced by subordinate clauses: pajùto šiañdie kitaĩp bū́siant; nelaúukiamą įlį̃siant. In one subordinate clause the indirect mood is used: kad mylį vienas antrą. The excerpt is full of adverbs, e.g., artì, stačiaĩ, kažìn_kaip, daugiaũ, etc., reflexive verbs, e.g. ė̃mės, nusìjuokė, kẽčias, nusiraškyti, etc. Of the more rare words worthy of mention are šabasìnis (festive, unhurried'; this is a suffixed derivative from the word šãbas).

Nuõ pàt kálno, lìgi tìk ją̃ išvýdo, Mykoliùkas ją̃ imtè ė̃mės į̃ savè, ar̃tino sáu Sevèriją, rýdamas er̃dvę, ir̃ kaĩ priė̃jo visái artì, nebenuléido sàvo akių̃, tìk didelė̃m didelė̃m, pilnõm bekrãščio džiaũgsmo ir̃ pasigėrė́jimo, žiūrė́jo stačiaĩ jái į̃ akelès.
 Expand All

Nusìjuokė Mykoliùkas, sustódamas gríežęs; nè balsù, tìk kažin kaĩp sàvo vìduriu.
 Expand All

Ir̃ daugiaũ nebègriežė.
 Expand All

Kám begriẽš, kàd dabar̃ jõ krūtìnėje, visamè jamè bùvo tokià mùzika, kuriõs jìs nègi išreĩkš menkù sàvo griežtuvėliù...
 Expand All

Sėdė́jo abùdu ir̃ niẽko daugiaũ nebekalbė́jo.
 Expand All

Jíem bùvo gẽra.
 Expand All

Taĩp gẽra, kaĩp pìlnu žíedu pražýdusiems žolýnams.
 Expand All

Jiẽ tar̃psta, kvẽpia, lapẽliai kẽčias į̃ šalìs, ìš sunkùmo lė̃psta.
 Expand All

Jiẽ grãžina píevą, tráukia į̃ savè bet kuriõ gývio akìs.
 Expand All

Ir̃ nė víenas vabzdỹs neapleñkia jų̃ nepabučiãvęs, añt jų̃ nepasilsė́jęs.
 Expand All

Tìk víenas nedõrėlis žmogùs tuõj síekia jõ - nusiraškýti ir̃, pavar̃čius pavar̃čius, numèsti, kàd bè laĩko nuvýstų, jaũ ùžmirštas.
 Expand All

Ką̃ jiẽ galė́jo víenas antrám pasisakýti?
 Expand All

Kàd mýlį víenas añtrą, kàd jíemdviem gẽra draugėjè?
 Expand All

Jùk taĩ ir̃ bè žõdžių áišku.
 Expand All

Dár pilniaũ.
 Expand All

Žõdžiai arbà nè vìską tepasãko, arbà per daũg pasãko ir̃ atvėsìna vìdų.
 Expand All

Žõdžiai - gãras: išsišnỹpščia ir̃ nebèkečia vidaũs.
 Expand All

Abùdu sė́dinčiu staigà pamãtė ìš raĩsto išsinė́rusį jų̃ šveñtvakarių beñdrą, dė̃l kuriõ jíemdviem šiaĩpjau bùvo neĩ šil̃ta, neĩ šálta.
 Expand All

Pasérgėjo ir̃ pagreĩtintą jõ žiñgsnį, nè tókį šabasìnį kaĩp kitomìs póilsio dienomìs.
 Expand All

Pasérgėję žingsniúojant tiẽsiai į̃ juõdu, pajùto šiañdie kitaĩp bū́siant, neláukiamą įlį̃siant į̃ tą̃ órą, kurį̃ tìk ką bùvo susidãrę pãtys sáu, sáu vieníem, kuriõ pavydù bùvo, kàd kitì kvėpúotų; įlį̃s ir̃ sudrum̃s užkerė́tą jų̃ méilės srìtį.
 Expand All

Lesson Text
Nuõ pàt kálno, lìgi tìk ją̃ išvýdo, Mykoliùkas ją̃ imtè ė̃mės į̃ savè, ar̃tino sáu Sevèriją, rýdamas er̃dvę, ir̃ kaĩ priė̃jo visái artì, nebenuléido sàvo akių̃, tìk didelė̃m didelė̃m, pilnõm bekrãščio džiaũgsmo ir̃ pasigėrė́jimo, žiūrė́jo stačiaĩ jái į̃ akelès. Nusìjuokė Mykoliùkas, sustódamas gríežęs; nè balsù, tìk kažin kaĩp sàvo vìduriu. Ir̃ daugiaũ nebègriežė. Kám begriẽš, kàd dabar̃ jõ krūtìnėje, visamè jamè bùvo tokià mùzika, kuriõs jìs nègi išreĩkš menkù sàvo griežtuvėliù... Sėdė́jo abùdu ir̃ niẽko daugiaũ nebekalbė́jo. Jíem bùvo gẽra. Taĩp gẽra, kaĩp pìlnu žíedu pražýdusiems žolýnams. Jiẽ tar̃psta, kvẽpia, lapẽliai kẽčias į̃ šalìs, ìš sunkùmo lė̃psta. Jiẽ grãžina píevą, tráukia į̃ savè bet kuriõ gývio akìs. Ir̃ nė víenas vabzdỹs neapleñkia jų̃ nepabučiãvęs, añt jų̃ nepasilsė́jęs. Tìk víenas nedõrėlis žmogùs tuõj síekia jõ - nusiraškýti ir̃, pavar̃čius pavar̃čius, numèsti, kàd bè laĩko nuvýstų, jaũ ùžmirštas. Ką̃ jiẽ galė́jo víenas antrám pasisakýti? Kàd mýlį víenas añtrą, kàd jíemdviem gẽra draugėjè? Jùk taĩ ir̃ bè žõdžių áišku. Dár pilniaũ. Žõdžiai arbà nè vìską tepasãko, arbà per daũg pasãko ir̃ atvėsìna vìdų. Žõdžiai - gãras: išsišnỹpščia ir̃ nebèkečia vidaũs. Abùdu sė́dinčiu staigà pamãtė ìš raĩsto išsinė́rusį jų̃ šveñtvakarių beñdrą, dė̃l kuriõ jíemdviem šiaĩpjau bùvo neĩ šil̃ta, neĩ šálta. Pasérgėjo ir̃ pagreĩtintą jõ žiñgsnį, nè tókį šabasìnį kaĩp kitomìs póilsio dienomìs. Pasérgėję žingsniúojant tiẽsiai į̃ juõdu, pajùto šiañdie kitaĩp bū́siant, neláukiamą įlį̃siant į̃ tą̃ órą, kurį̃ tìk ką bùvo susidãrę pãtys sáu, sáu vieníem, kuriõ pavydù bùvo, kàd kitì kvėpúotų; įlį̃s ir̃ sudrum̃s užkerė́tą jų̃ méilės srìtį.
Translation
From that very hill, as soon as he caught sight of her, he took her into himself, he brought Severija near to himself, eagerly devouring the space and when she got very near, he no longer lowered his gaze, but with great eyes full of limitless joy and pleasure looked her straight in the eyes.
Stopping his playing Mykoliukas laughed, not with his voice, but somehow or other with his insides. And played no more. Why would he play, when now in his breast, in all of him, there was such music, which he could never express with his insignificant little instrument.
They both sat and said nothing more. It was nice for both of them. It was just as nice as for blossoming greenery in full bloom. They grow luxuriantly, they smell good, the leaves spread out to the sides, grow limp from heaviness. They adorn the meadow and attract to themselves the eyes of any living thing. And not a single insect passes them by without kissing (them) and without resting on them. Only the human being (dishonorable as he is known to be) reaches for it immediately - to tear it off for himself and having turned it over, to throw it away so that it would fade before its time, already forgotten.
What could they say to each other? That they love each other, that they like being together? But that is clear without words. Or even more. Words either don't say everything or they say too much and make the insides cold. Words are steam. They make a noise, but they don't reach the insides.
While both of them were sitting there, they saw arising from the marsh a participant in the holiday evenings someone about whom both were indifferent. They watched his accelerated pace, which was not so festive and unhurried as on other days of rest. Watching him walking directly to them, they felt that today would be different, unexpectedly forcing its way into that atmosphere which they had just created for themselves only, the two of them alone, of which they were jealous, that other people might breathe it. It will force its way in and disturb the charmed dimension of their love.
Grammar
21 Numerals
21.1 The Ordinal Numerals
Ordinal numerals are mostly derived from the corresponding cardinal numerals by adding the suffix -tas,-ta. The formation of pìrmas 'first', añtras 'second' and trẽčias 'third' differs from that of other ordinal numerals. These numerals denote place in a series. They are declined like regular adjectives (cf: pìktas, piktà 'angry') and agree with the word they modify in case, number and gender. The following ordinal numerals are used most frequently:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	pìrmas 'first'	 	pirmà
 	 	añtras 'second'	 	antrà
 	 	trẽčias 'third'	 	trečià
 	 	ketvir̃tas 'fourth'	 	ketvirtà
 	 	peñktas 'fifth'	 	penktà
 	 	šẽštas 'sixth'	 	šeštà
 	 	septiñtas 'seventh'	 	septintà
 	 	aštuñtas 'eighth'	 	aštuntà
 	 	deviñtas 'ninth'	 	devintà
 	 	dešim̃tas 'tenth'	 	dešimtà
 	 	vienúoliktas 'eleventh'	 	vienúolikta
 	 	dvýliktas 'twelfth'	 	dvýlikta
 	 	trýliktas 'thirteenth'	 	trýlikta
 	 	keturióliktas 'fourteenth'	 	keturiólikta
 	 	penkióliktas 'fifteenth'	 	penkiólikta
 	 	šešióliktas 'sixteenth'	 	šešiólikta
 	 	septynióliktas 'seventeenth'	 	septyniólikta
 	 	aštuonióliktas 'eighteenth'	 	aštuoniólikta
 	 	devynióliktas 'nineteenth'	 	devyniólikta
 	 	dvidešim̃tas 'twentieth'	 	dvidešimtà
 	 	trisdešim̃tas 'thirtieth'	 	trisdešimtà
 	 	keturiasdešim̃tas 'fortieth'	 	keturiasdešimtà
 	 	penkiasdešim̃tas 'fiftieth'	 	penkiasdešimtà
 	 	šešiasdešim̃tas 'sixtieth'	 	šešiasdešimtà
 	 	septyniasdešim̃tas 'seventieth'	 	septyniasdešimtà
 	 	aštuoniasdešim̃tas 'eightieth'	 	aštuoniasdešimtà
 	 	devyniasdešim̃tas 'ninetieth'	 	devyniasdešimtà
Ordinal numerals possess definite forms which are similar to the adjectives of the first declension (cf: naũjas 'new', naujà), e.g., pirmàsis 'the first', pirmóji; antràsis 'the second', antróji; trečiàsis 'the third', trečióji, etc.:

Paũlius bùvo trečiàsis vaĩkas màno brólio šeimojè
'Paulius was the third child in my brother's family'.
Rytój Violetà šveñčia sàvo šešióliktąjį gimtãdienį
'Tomorrow Violeta is celebrating her sixteenth birthday'.
Definite ordinal numerals are used to designate dates, e.g.:

Taĩ įvỹko tū́kstantis penkì šimtaĩ kẽturiasdešimt septintaĩsiais
'That happened in one thousand five hundred and forty-seven'.
In a compound ordinal number only the final element has the form of an ordinal numeral and is declined. The other elements remain in the nominative case, e.g.:

Nom.	 	penkì šimtaĩ trìsdešimt ketvir̃tas tãškas 'the five hundred thirty fourth point.'
Gen.	 	penkì šimtaĩ trìsdešimt ketvir̃to tãško
Dat.	 	penkì šimtaĩ trìsdešimt ketvirtám tãškui
Acc.	 	penkì šimtaĩ trìsdešimt ketvir̃tą tãšką, etc.
They also have a neuter form, e.g., pìrmas 'first': pìrma; añtras 'second': añtra; peñktas 'fifth': peñkta, etc.:

Pìrma, bū́tina atsikélti aštuñtą vãlandą rýto; añtra, paskam̃binti į̃ aeroúostą; trẽčia, susikráuti lagamìną... 'First, it is necessary to get up at eight in the morning; second, to call the airport; third, to pack the suitcase...'

21.2 Fractions
In mathematics such forms as vienà antróji 'one-half', dvì trẽčiosios 'two-thirds', trỹs peñktosios 'three fifths' are used. The numerator is a feminine cardinal number and the denominator is a feminine ordinal number in the definite form. The denominator always agrees with dalìs 'part' in gender, although the word dalìs does not appear in any fraction. When the numerator is a numeral from 1 to 9 the denominator agrees with the numerator in gender, number and case, e.g., Padalìnk ìš dviejų̃ trečių̃jų 'Divide by two-thirds'. When the numerator is any other numeral (except from 1 to 9), the denominator is always in the genitive plural, e.g., Vienúolikos dvidešimtų̃jų neįmãnoma suprãstinti 'It is impossible to simplify eleven-twentieths'.

Parts of things are most often indicated by compound numerals. Their first component is the root of an ordinal numeral, and the second component is the noun dalìs 'part'. They are listed below:

trẽčdalis 'one third': trẽčdalis pasáulio 'one-third of the world'; ketvirtãdalis 'one fourth': ketvirtãdalis valandõs 'one-fourth of an hour'; penktãdalis 'one fifth': penktãdalis studeñtų 'one-fifth of the students'; šeštãdalis 'one sixth': šeštãdalis augalų̃ 'one-sixth of the plants'; septintãdalis 'one seventh': septintãdalis ligónių 'one-seventh of the patients'; aštuntãdalis 'one eighth': aštuntãdalis gãtvių 'one-eighth of the streets'; devintãdalis 'one ninth': devintãdalis Euròpos 'one-ninth of Europe'; dešimtãdalis 'one tenth': dešimtãdalis paskolõs 'one-tenth of a loan'.

All these numerals are declined like the nouns of the first declension (cf: brólis). Fractions vienà antróji 'one-half' and vienà ketvirtóji are often replaced by the feminine noun pùsė 'half' and the masculine noun ketvir̃tis 'quarter' respectively, e.g.:

Láukiau tavę̃s pùsę valandõs 'I was waiting for you a half an hour'.
Mẽs prarãdome ketvir̃tį milijõno 'We have lost a quarter of a million'.
There is a group of numerals the first component of which is the root of the noun pùsė 'half' and the second component of which is an ordinal numeral in the genitive, e.g.:

 	 	Masc. sing.	 	Fem. sing.	 	Plural
 	 	pusañtro 'one and a half'	 	pusantrõs	 	pusantrų̃
 	 	pustrẽčio 'two and a half'	 	pustrečiõs	 	pustrečių̃
 	 	pusketvir̃to 'three and a half'	 	pusketvirtõs	 	pusketvirtų̃
 	 	puspeñkto 'four and a half'	 	puspenktõs	 	puspenktų̃
 	 	pusšẽšto 'five and a half'	 	pusšeštõs	 	pusšeštų̃
 	 	pusseptiñto 'six and a half'	 	pusseptintõs	 	pusseptintų̃
 	 	pusaštuñto 'seven and a half'	 	pusaštuntõs	 	pusaštuntų̃
 	 	pusdeviñto 'eight and a half'	 	pusdevintõs	 	pusdevintų̃
 	 	pusdešim̃to 'nine and a half'	 	pusdešimtõs	 	pusdešimtų̃
Žadù nusipir̃kti pustrečiõs tònos kviečių̃ 'I intend to buy two and a half tons of wheat'.
Kur̃ tù buvaĩ pusantrõs saváitės? 'Where were you for a week and a half?'
22 Reflexive Verbs and Verbal Prefixes
22.1 The Reflexive Verbs
The reflexive verbs in Lithuanian can be divided into two groups: simple reflexive verbs where the reflexive particle -si or -s is added at the end and compound reflexive verbs where the reflexive particle -si is inserted between the prefix and the verb proper. To this group also belong all reflexive verbs in their negative forms. The negative particle ne is treated in such cases as a prefix, e.g., jis kartójasi 'he repeats himself', jìs nesikartója 'he does not repeat himself'. In the latter group, the conjugation of the basic verb does not change at all, only the -si- is inserted.

It is a little more difficult to learn the simple reflexive verbs. Certain changes occur both in the endings of these verbs and the reflexive particle -si:

 	 	Present	 	Preterit	 	Preterit Frequentative
1st sg	 	gailiúosi 'I regret'	 	gailė́jausi 'I regretted'	 	gailė́davausi 'I used to regret'
2nd sg	 	gailíesi	 	gailė́jaisi	 	gailė́davaisi
3rd sg	 	gaĩlisi	 	gailė́josi	 	gailė́davosi
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	gaĩlimės	 	gailė́jomės	 	gailė́davomės
2nd pl	 	gaĩlitės	 	gailė́jotės	 	gailė́davotės
3rd pl	 	gaĩlisi	 	gailė́josi	 	gailė́davosi
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	Future	 	Subjunctive	 	Imperative
1st sg	 	gailė́siuosi 'I will regret'	 	gailė́čiausi 'I would regret'	 	 
2nd sg	 	gailė́siesi	 	gailė́tumeisi	 	gailė́kis 'regret'
3rd sg	 	gailė́sis	 	gailė́tųsi	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	gailė́simės	 	gailė́tu(mė)mės	 	gailė́kimės
2nd pl	 	gailė́sitės	 	gailė́tumėtės	 	gailė́kitės
3rd pl	 	gailė́sis	 	gailė́tųsi	 	 
In present and future the first person singular endings -u and -iu are replaced by -uo- and -iuo- respectively and the second person singular ending -i is replaced by -ie-. In the first and second plural, instead of -si, only -s is added, and the short final -e of these forms is replaced by -ė. The third person future has the shortened variant of the reflexive particle. Also there is an -i- inserted after the consonant s. In the imperative the longer suffix -ki is retained.

The stress pattern is the same as in the non-reflexive verbs.

The reflexive particle may change the verbal meaning in a variety of ways, cf:

Vakarè išmáudžiau vaikùs, po to išsimaudžiau pats 'In the evening I bathed the children, later I took a bath myself'.
Vìskas pasìkeitė jíems čia apsigyvẽnus. Butè jiẽ pàkeitė visùs senùs baldùs 'Everything changed when they moved here. They changed all the old furniture in the apartment'.
Jám visadà sunkù valdýti sàvo emòcijas, tačiau vãkar jìs vis dėlto pàjėgė susivalýti 'It is always difficult for him to control his emotions, but yesterday he was nevertheless able to control himself'.
Čià jìs šaũkia gýdytoją, čià šaũkiasi Diẽvo malónės Sometimes he calls for a doctor, sometimes he cries for the grace of God'.
A number of reflexive verbs are unrelated to any underlying verb (reflexiva tantum), e.g., el̃gtis 'to behave', juõktis 'to laugh', didžiúotis 'to be proud of', pasiìlgti 'to miss', drovė́tis 'to be shy', teiráutis 'to inquire', etc.

22.2 Verbal Prefixes
The system of word formation with verbal prefixes is highly developed in Lithuanian. Prefixes may change or modify the meaning of the verb. The addition of a prefix usually renders the verb perfective.

The most common prefixes in Lithuanian are the following: ap- (api-), at-, (ati-), į-, iš-, nu-, pa-, par-, per-, pra-, pri-, su-, už-. Several examples of common prefixes with a few of the ordinary meanings are given below.

at- (ati-) may denote:

arrival, coming to a certain place, e.g., atvažiúoti 'to come', atnèšti 'to bring';
separation or division or removal, e.g., atkir̃sti 'to cut off', atskìrti 'to separate', 'to detach';
return to an original position, e.g., atáugti 'to grow back', 'to grow again', atgìmti 'to be reborn', 'to be revived';
the completion of an action, e.g., atpìgti 'to become cheap', to fall in price', atbùkti 'to become blunt'.
į- may denote:

motion into a place or an object, e.g., įskrìsti 'fly in'; įnèšti 'bring in, carry in';
the beginning of an action which is carried out only to a slight degree, e.g., įkir̃pti 'to cut a little bit', 'to cut into something', įtrū́kti 'get slightly broken';
completion of an action, e.g., įtìkinti 'to persuade', įvýkdyti 'to carry out, to complete';
it also may be used with verbs formed from nouns or adjectives, e.g., įámžinti 'to immortalize' (cf: ámžinas 'eternal'), įpareigóti 'to oblige', 'to bind' (cf: pareigà 'duty', 'obligation').
iš- may denote:

motion out of something, e.g., išskrìsti 'to fly out', išnèšti 'to carry out', 'to take out';
the action covering the entire area or whole series of objects, e.g., išbarstýti 'spill', 'to scatter', išžudýti 'to exterminate';
an action lasting for a certain length of time, e.g., išláukti 'to wait for a certain length of time', išbū́ti 'to stay', 'to remain for a certain length of time';
completion or fulfilment of an action, e.g., išlõšti 'to win', išskal̃bti 'to wash', 'to launder'.
nu- may denote:

motion away from something or some place, e.g., nuvažiúoti 'to go to (away)', 'to depart to', nubė́gti 'to run away';
motion downwards, e.g., nukrìsti 'fall down', 'fall off', nušókti 'to jump down';
severance from the main part of an object, e.g., nulíeti 'to pour off', nupjáuti 'to cut off';
completion of an action to the very end, e.g., nuskandìnti 'to drown', 'to sink'.
pa- may denote:

the complection of an action, e.g., pasakýti 'to say', 'to tell', pastatýti 'to build', 'to construct';
a short duration of an action, e.g., paskal̃bti 'to wash for a little while', panèšti 'to carry for a little bit';
that something is put under something else, e.g., padė́ti 'to put under', 'to lay under', palį̃sti 'to creep under';
the ability or capacity to perform a certain action, e.g., pastùmti 'to be able to push' panèšti 'to be able to carry'.
per- may denote:

motion across or through something, e.g., pérnešti 'to carry across', pérlįsti 'creep through', 'to get through';
separation or division, e.g., pérpjauti 'to cut into two', pérlaužti 'to break into two';
the repetition or the renewal of an action, e.g., pérskaičiuoti 'to count again' pérskalbti 'to wash again';
exceeding of the norm or going beyond a certain limit, e.g., pérmokėti 'to overpay' pérsidirbti 'to overwork'.
pra- may denote:

movement by or past some place, e.g., praskrìsti 'to fly by', 'to fly past', pravažiúoti 'to drive past', 'to ride past';
movement through something or some place, e.g., praláužti 'to break through', prapjáuti 'to cut through';
disappearance, loss or lack of something, e.g., pradiñgti 'to disappear', praválgyti 'to eat away (one's money);
the passage of a certain length of time in some activity, e.g., praláukti 'to spend a certain time waiting for', pragalvóti 'to think for a certain length of time'.
su- may denote:

gathering together or a coming-together, e.g., sunèšti 'to bring together', suvažiúoti 'to come together';
dissection or division into parts, e.g., suláužyti 'to break into parts', sutrùpinti 'to crumble';
the attainment of the goal or the aim, e.g., suràsti 'to find' (what one has lost)', susèkti 'to trace down, to find out'.
už- may denote:

the direction up, e.g., užnèšti 'to carry up', to bring up', užlìpti 'to climb up', 'to mount', 'to ascend';
that something is put on something else, e.g., uždeñgti 'to cover', užpìlti 'to strew on', 'to fill up', 'to cover with';
putting something behind something else or going behind something, e.g., užstatýti 'to place behind', užtámsinti 'to shade';
the completion of an action, e.g., užmokė́ti 'to pay', užkùrti 'to light up', 'to set fire to'.
Many verbal prefixes modify the meaning of the verb or show a distinct direction, e.g., mèsti 'to throw', 'to hurl', ' to chuck', apmesti 'to throw with', 'to cover with', atmèsti 'to throw off', 'to cast away', įmèsti 'to throw in', 'to cast in' išmèsti 'to throw out', numèsti 'to throw down', 'to fling down', 'to drop', , 'to throw off', 'to cast off', 'to throw far away', 'to cast far away', pamèsti 'to throw under', ' to throw a little', 'to toss a little', parmèsti 'to throw down', 'to bring down', pérmesti 'to throw over', 'to throw across', pramèsti 'to throw past', 'to miss in throwing' primesti 'to throw (full, a quantity of)', 'to heap up', 'to cast (full, a quantity of)', 'to heap up', 'to fill', 'to throw about', sumèsti 'to throw into', 'to throw together' 'to pile', 'to heap', užmèsti 'to throw on', 'to throw over', 'to fling on', 'to throw behind'.

But in some few cases the prefix can change the real verbal meaning or give to the verb an opposite meaning dúoti 'to give', pardúoti 'to sell', laimė́ti 'to win', pralaimė́ti 'to lose', prìmesti 'to press on', 'to thrust on', 'to impute to', sumèsti 'to understand', count up', etc.

Some verbs may have practically the same meaning with either of two prefixes, e.g., išnỹkti, pranỹkti 'to disappear', išgýti, pagýti 'to recover', 'to get better', etc. The prefix does not give a new meaning to some verbs and therefore the verb means practically the same thing with or without the prefix, e.g., baĩgti, pabaĩgti, užbaĩgti 'to finish' grį̃žti, sugrį̃žti 'to return', etc.

The correct usage of prefixes may cause a major problem for foreign learners.

In the clause prefixes correlate with corresponding prepositions: ap- and apiẽ 'about','off'; į- and į̃ 'in', 'into', 'to'; iš- and ìš 'from', 'out of'; nu- and nuõ 'from', 'off', 'down'; pa- and põ 'in', 'about', etc.; per- and per̃ 'through', 'across', etc.; pra- and prõ 'through', 'by'; pri- and priẽ 'at', 'by', etc.; su- and sù 'with'; už- and ùž 'behind', 'beyond', e.g.:

Jiẽ išvažiãvo ìš namų̃ ankstì rýtą 'They left their home early in the morning'.
Vidùrdienį mẽs pérsikėlėm per̃ ùpę 'At midday we crossed the river'.
Automobìlis nuslydo nuõ kẽlio 'The car slid off the road'.
23 The Passive and Reflexive Participles
23.1 The Passive Participles
In Lithuanian the present passive participle and the past passive participle are more common than the future passive participle which is relatively rare. The forms of the so-called 'participles of necessity' are also passive. The present and past passive participles may be used either to form the passive voice of various tenses or they may be used attributively like adjectives.

The Present Passive Participle.

The present passive participle is formed by adding the endings -mas, -ma to the third person present of the finite verbs, e.g.:

nom.sg.masc.	 	mýli '(he) loves + -mas = mýlimas 'beloved';
nom.sg.fem.	 	mýli '(she) loves + -ma = mylimà 'beloved'.
The declension of the present passive participle is given below (cf: the adjectives pìktas, piktà 'angry'):

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	mýlimas 'beloved'	 	mylimà
Gen sg	 	mýlimo	 	mylimõs
Dat sg	 	mylimám	 	mýlimai
Acc sg	 	mýlimą	 	mýlimą
Inst sg	 	mýlimu	 	mýlima
Loc sg	 	mylimamè	 	mylimojè
 	 	mylimam̃	 	mylimõj
 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	mylimì	 	mýlimos
Gen pl	 	mylimų̃	 	mylimų̃
Dat pl	 	mylimíems	 	mylimóms
 	 	mylimíem	 	mylimóm
Acc pl	 	mýlimus	 	mýlimas
Inst pl	 	mylimaĩs	 	mylimomìs
 	 	 	 	mylimõm
Loc pl	 	mylimuosè	 	mylimosè
 	 	mylimuõs	 	 
The definite forms of the present passive participles can frequently be used as nouns, e.g.:

Válgomasis bùvo pìlnas žmonių̃ 'The dining-room was full of people'.
Nepažįstamóji pasisiū́lė padė́ti 'The stranger offered her help'.
Other definite participles (active and passive) may also be used in nominal positions, e.g.:

Láukiantieji priẽ dùrų ìma nerimáuti 'The people waiting at the door start to worry'.
Kalbė́jusieji staigà nutìlo ir̃ suklùso 'The people who were speaking suddenly hushed and pricked up their ears'.
Kviestíeji neatvỹko 'The invitees did not come'.
The Past Passive Participle.

The past passive participle is formed by removing the infinitive ending -ti and adding the -tas, -ta, e.g.:

masc.nom.sg.: mylė́-ti 'to love' + -tas = mylė́tas 'loved, having been loved';
fem.nom.sg.: mylė́-ti 'to love' + -ta = mylė́ta 'loved, having been loved'.
The paradigm is as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
Nom sg	 	mylė́tas 'having been loved'	 	mylė́ta
Gen sg	 	mylė́to	 	mylė́tos
Dat sg	 	mylė́tam	 	mylė́tai
Acc sg	 	mylė́tą	 	mylė́tą
Inst sg	 	mylė́tu	 	mylė́ta
Loc sg	 	mylė́tam(e)	 	mylė́toj(e)
 	 	 	 	 
Nom pl	 	mylė́ti	 	mylė́tos
Gen pl	 	mylė́tų	 	mylė́tų
Dat pl	 	mylė́tiem(s)	 	mylė́tom(s)
Acc pl	 	mylė́tus	 	mylė́tas
Inst pl	 	mylė́tais	 	mylė́tomis
Loc pl	 	mylė́tuos(e)	 	mylė́tose
The Future Passive Participle.

The future passive participle is formed by adding the endings -mas, -ma to the second person singular of the future tense, e.g.:

masc.nom.sg.	 	bū́si 'you (sg) will be' + -mas = bū́simas;
fem.nom.sg.	 	bū́si 'you (sg) will be' + -ma = būsimà.
Except for the participle bū́simas, būsimà, future passive participles are rarely used. Future passive participles are declined like present passive participles:

Àš vìs atidėliójau tą̃ sàvo bū́simą susitikìmą
'I kept putting off my forthcoming meeting'.
The Participle of Necessity.

The participle of necessity is formed by adding the endings -nas, -na to the verbal infinitive, e.g.:

masc.nom.sg.	 	vartóti 'to use' + -nas = vartótinas 'which should be used';
fem.nom.sg.	 	vartóti 'to use' + -na = vartótina 'which should be used'.
The participle of necessity denotes an action which should be performed or is worthy of being performed, e.g.:

Šìs atmiñtinas susitikìmas įvỹko priẽš peñkerius metùs 'This memorable meeting took place five years ago'.
Reĩkia ieškóti išeitiẽs ìš tokiõs apverktinõs situãcijos 'It is necessary to seek a way out of such a lamentable situation'.
The most frequent forms, however, do not bear any of the meaning of necessity and function merely as verbal adjectives.

23.2 The Reflexive Participles
The participles can also be reflexive. The reflexive active participles without prefixes are formed by adding the reflexive particle to the ending of the nominative case. The reflexive particle -s is added to the end of the simple particle in the singular and -si to the plural. In the masculine singular there is an -i- inserted between the participle and the final -s of the ending.

Present active participles:

Nom.sg.masc.	 	gydą̃s-is 'curing, healing'
Nom.sg.fem.	 	gýdanti-s
Nom.pl.masc.	 	gydą̃si
Past active participles:

Nom.sg.masc.	 	gýdęs-is
Nom.sg.fem.	 	gýdžiusi-s
Nom.pl.masc.	 	gýdę-si
These participles are used only in the masculine and feminine singular and the masculine plural, e.g.:

Sãko, kàd jìs šiuõ metù gydą̃sis nuõ plaũčių uždegìmo 'They say, now he is being treated for pneumonia'.
Nustók tikė́jęsis stebùklo 'Stop waiting for a miracle'.
If the verb is prefixed, than the reflexive particle -si- is inserted after the prefix, but before the root of the verb. Then all of the cases of the participle may be used, e.g., present active participle: nom.sg.masc. besigydą̃s, besigýdantis, gen.sg.masc. besigýdančio, dat.sg.masc. besigýdančiam, etc.; past active participle: išsigýdęs, išsigýdžiusio, išsigýdžiusiam, etc.:

Gãtvė bùvo pilnà besilìnksminančių žmonių̃ 'The street was full of celebrating people'.
Pasidžiaũgęs gerà žinià pàkviečiau pùsbrolį išgérti kavõs 'Having rejoiced at the good news, I invited my cousin to take a cup of coffee'.
The masculine and feminine forms of reflexive passive participles are created only from prefixed verbs, e.g.: išsìperkamas, 'being redeemed', išsiperkamà, išsìpirktas, '(having been) redeemed' išsipirktà:

Atsìnešto maĩsto jíems neužtẽko nė̃ dvíem dienóms
Food brought with them was not enough even for two days'.
The neuter forms of reflexive passive participles can be formed both from prefixed and non-prefixed verbs, e.g., kal̃bamasi, pasìkalbama '(being) spoken of, about '; kalbė́tasi, pasikalbḗta '(having been) spoken of, about'':

Jų̃ kalbė́tasi apiẽ tolèsnio bendradarbiãvimo perspektyvàs
'They spoke among themselves about perspectives for further collaboration'.
The reflexive half-participles and gerunds are formed in the same way as the active participles.

24 The Compound Tenses of the Active Voice
Compound tenses are formed with the finite forms of the auxiliary bū́ti 'to be' and the present or past active or passive participle. Compound tenses containing active participles belong to the active voice, and those containing passive participles belong to the passive voice.

Compound forms with a present active participle form compound continuative tenses and moods, and those with a present passive participle form compound imperfect tenses and moods. Compound forms containing past active or passive participle are used as compound active or passive perfect tenses and moods.

24.1 Continuative Tenses
The past, the past frequentative and the future tense of the verb bū́ti 'to be' may be used with the appropriate form of the present active participle (prefixed with be-) to express an action which is not, or could not be completed. These forms are somewhat similar in meaning to the various progressive tenses of English. There are no present tense continuative forms in modern Lithuanian. The compound past continuative is most frequently used. A sample paradigm with the past tense is given below:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
1st sg	 	àš buvaũ beperką̃s 'I was buying'	 	àš buvaũ bèperkanti
2nd sg	 	tù buvaĩ beperką̃s 'you were buying'	 	tù buvaĩ bèperkanti
3rd sg	 	jìs bùvo beperką̃s 'he was buying'	 	jì bùvo bèperkanti
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bùvom(e) beperką̃ 'we were buying'	 	mẽs bùvom(e) bèperkančios
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) beperką̃ 'you were buying'	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) bèperkančios
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùvo beperką̃ 'they were buying'	 	jõs bùvo bèperkančios
The number and gender of the participle are always the same as the number and gender of the subject. The participle is always in the nominative case to agree with the subject of the verb which is also in the nominative case, e.g.:

Buvaũ jaũ bèperkanti tą̃ kerãminę vãzą, bèt paskutìnę minùtę pastebė́jau, kàd jì įtrū́kusi 'I was already buying that ceramic vase but at the last minute I saw that it had slightly broken.
Rytõj tókiu pàt laikù jìs jaũ bùs bekeliáująs namõ 'Tomorrow at the same time he will be already travelling home'.
24.2 Perfect Tenses
Compound perfect tenses are formed with the auxiliary verb bū́ti 'to be' and the past active participle. Bū́ti is used in one of its finite forms. Compound perfect forms occur in the present, past, past frequentative and future of the indicative mood and also in the subjunctive and imperative.

As in English the present perfect tense denotes the present state which is the result of a past action. It may not, however, denote a past action continuing into the present as does the English perfect tense, cf:

Šiojè į́monėje jì dìrba jaũ penkiólika mẽtų
'She has been working in this company for fifteen years'.
In this case the English perfect tense is translated with a Lithuanian present tense.

The present perfect tense is formed with the present conjugation of the verb bū́ti and the form of the past active participle agrees in gender and number with the subject:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
1st sg	 	àš esù pir̃kęs 'I have bought'	 	àš esù pir̃kusi
2nd sg	 	tù esì pir̃kęs 'you have bought'	 	tù esì pir̃kusi
3rd sg	 	jìs yrà pir̃kęs 'he has bought'	 	jì yrà pir̃kusi
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs ẽsam(e) pir̃kę 'we have bought'	 	mẽs ẽsam(e) pir̃kusios
2nd pl	 	jū̃s ẽsat(e) pir̃kę 'you have bought'	 	jū̃s ẽsat(e) pir̃kusios
3rd pl	 	jiẽ yrà pir̃kę 'they have bought'	 	jõs yrà pir̃kusios
Kẽletą kar̃tų ir̃ àš esù pažeĩdusi eĩsmo taisyklès 'I too have violated traffic regulations several times'.
Jiẽ niekadà nėrà bùvę tokiamè gūdžiamè miškè 'They have never been in such a gloomy forest'.
The pluperfect tense is formed with the preterit of the verb bū́ti plus the past active participle. The gender and number of the participle depend upon the gender and number of the subject. A sample paradigm is given below:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
1st sg	 	àš buvaũ pir̃kęs 'I had bought'	 	àš buvaũ pir̃kusi
2nd sg	 	tù buvaĩ pir̃kęs 'you had bought'	 	t̀u buvaĩ pir̃kusi
3rd sg	 	jìs bùvo pir̃kęs 'he had bought'	 	jì bùvo pir̃kusi
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bùvom(e) pir̃kę 'we had bought'	 	mẽs bùvom(e) pir̃kusios
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) pir̃kę 'you had bought'	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) pir̃kusios
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùvo pir̃kę 'they had bought'	 	jõs bùvo pir̃kusios
This tense denotes a state which had been attained in the past. It may have been completed either during the time when another action took place or prior to the time another action took place:

Kaĩ mẽs atvažiãvom, seser̃s šeimà jaũ bùvo išvỹkusi atostogáuti 'When we came my sister's family had already left for vacation'.
Ingridà sugebė́jo iškèpti vìštą, kõl svečiai atė̃jo 'Ingrida was able to fry a chicken before the guests came'.
The frequentative perfect tense is a compound tense formed with the frequentative past of the verb bū́ti plus the past active participle:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
1st sg	 	àš bū́davau pir̃kęs	 	àš bū́davau pir̃kusi
2nd sg	 	tù bū́davai pir̃kęs	 	tù bū́davai pir̃kusi
3rd sg	 	jìs bū́davo pir̃kęs	 	jì bū́davo pir̃kusi
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) pir̃kę	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) pir̃kusios
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) pir̃kę	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) pir̃kusios
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bū́davo pir̃kę	 	jõs bū́davo pir̃kusios
This tense denotes a state which was attained at different times in the past:

Mẽs jaũ bū́davom papietãvę, kai į̃ válgomąjį įžeñgdavo jì
'We had already finished having dinner when(ever) she entered the dinning-room'.
The future perfect tense is formed with the future tense of the verb bū́ti plus the appropriate form of the past active participle. The gender and number of the participle depend upon the gender and the number of the subject. A sample conjugation is given below:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
1st sg	 	àš bū́siu pir̃kęs 'I will have bought'	 	àš bū́siu pir̃kusi
2nd sg	 	tù bū́si pir̃kęs 'you will have bought'	 	tù bū́si pir̃kusi
3rd sg	 	jìs bùs pir̃kęs 'he will have bought'	 	jì bùs pir̃kusi
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) pir̃kę 'we will have bought'	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) pir̃kusios
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) pir̃kę 'you will have bought'	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) pir̃kusios
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùs pir̃kę 'they will have bought'	 	jõs bùs pir̃kusios
The future perfect tense may express an action which will have taken place before another future action takes place. It may also express a condition or state which will last some time in the future as the result of a future action. Sometimes it expresses the probability that an event has taken place, e.g.:

Jéi tù mán skam̃binsi deviñtą vãlandą rýto, àš jaũ bū́siu išė̃jusi į̃ dárbą 'If you call me at nine in the morning, I will have gone to work'.
Kai ateĩs ruduõ, mẽs nãmą jaũ bū́sim pastãtę 'When autumn comes we will have built the house'.
Turbū́t Rasà bùs nuė̃jusi miegóti 'Rasa probably must have gone (somewhere) to sleep'.
In English we must use the present tense after 'when', even if a future time is implied. Since this rule does not apply to Lithuanian the future tense must be used when a future time is specified.

The compound tenses of the active voice also occur in the subjunctive and imperative, e.g., bū́tų beperką̃s; bū́k beperką̃; bū́tų pir̃kęs; bū́k pir̃kęs, e.g.:

Simonà bū́tų pir̃kusi, jéi bū́tų turė́jusi pinigų̃
'Simona would have bought (something), if she had had some money'.
25 Use of the Nominative, Genitive and Dative
All case forms, with the exception of the nominative, dative and locative, may occur either alone or with prepositions. They usually depend on the verbs.

25.1 Nominative
The nominative does not depend on any other word in a clause. Its closest "partner" is a verb. It functions mostly as a subject or predicative complement, e.g.:

Sáulė yrà mil̃žiniška žvaigždė̃
'The sun is a large star'.
The nominative case is also used in certain time expressions, e.g.:

Jaũ kelì mẽtai vãsaros bū̃na šáltos 'It is already a few years that summers have been cold'.
Kàs minùtė viduñ įžeñgdavo naũjas klieñtas 'Every minute a new client would come in'.
The accusative, however, is more common under these circumstances in modern Lithuanian.

25.2 Genitive
When not governed by a preposition nouns in the genitive are mostly used as objects or as modifiers. Certain verbs require the direct object in the genitive case rather than in the accusative, e.g., ieškóti, 'to look for', 'to seek'; norė́ti 'to wish', 'to want'; láukti 'to wait for'; mókytis 'to study', etc.:

Jìs visuomèt nóri didžiáusio ką́snio 'He always wants the biggest piece'.
Daũgelis amerikiẽčių íeško sàvo šaknų̃ Euròpoje 'Many Americans look for their roots in Europe'.
Láukiame ìš tavę̃s gerų̃ žinių̃ 'We are waiting for good news from you'.
The genitive is used as the direct object of a negated verb, e.g.:

Jì nevairúoja automobìlio (cf: Jì vairúoja automobìlį)
'She does not drive a car' (cf: She drives a car').
The object of an infinitive which is in turn the object of a negated verb may be in the genitive case, e.g.:

Jì nenóri atidúoti jíems didžiáusio ką́snio
'She does not want to let them have the biggest piece'.
The word ką́snis 'piece' is in the genitive case although it is the direct object of atidúoti, not nóri 'wants'.

In order to express an indefinite amount or quantity the genitive may be used where either the nominative or accusative would otherwise be required, e.g.:

Sutikaũ ir̃ blogų̃ žmonių̃ 'I have also met some bad people'.
Vakarè atvažiãvo draugų̃ 'In the evening some friends came'.
Kiekvíenas tùrime ýdų 'Everybody has some faults'.
The genitive may be used as a nominal object of an infinitive which follows a verb of motion. In this case it has the meaning of purpose, e.g.:

Grįžaũ daiktų̃ pasiim̃ti 'I came back to take (my) things'.
Mẽs važiúojam pir̃kti šaldytùvo 'We are going (somewhere) to buy a refrigerator''.
The verbs pasiim̃ti 'to take' and pir̃kti are transitive verbs and must take a direct object in the accusative case under most other circumstances.

The genitive is used with certain nouns and adverbs of quantity, e.g., kilogrãmas jáutienos 'a kilo of beef'; puodẽlis kavos 'a cup of coffee', daũg mẽdžių 'many trees'; mažaĩ ežerų̃ 'few lakes'.

When the genitive case is used to show possession the noun in the genitive cases is usually placed before the object possessed, e.g., brólio nãmas 'brother's house'; móters pir̃štai 'the woman's fingers'.

Many prepositions require the genitive case. The most common prepositions used with genitive are as follows:

 	 	Añt 'on':	 	Nesėdė́k añt láiptų - péršalsi
 	 	 	 	'Do not sit on the stairs, you will get a cold'.
 	 	Bè 'without':	 	Dalìs žmonių̃ negãli išgyvénti bè valstýbės paramõs
 	 	 	 	'Some people can't survive without support from the government'.
 	 	Dė̃l 'through', 'because of', 'due to':	 	Skrỹdis bùvo atidė́tas dė̃l rū̃ko
 	 	 	 	'The flight has been cancelled due to fog'.
 	 	Ìš 'out of', away from':	 	Ìš kam̃bario sklìdo triùkšmas
 	 	 	 	'The noise came from the room'.
 	 	Nuõ 'from', away from':	 	Nuõ sáulės slė̃pėmės põ dìdeliu medžiù
 	 	 	 	'We were hidden from the sun under the big tree'.
 	 	Ikì (ligì) 'to', 'up to', 'until':	 	Ikì vãkaro dažýti síenų nespė́sim baĩgti
 	 	 	 	'We will not able to finish painting the walls until the evening'.
 	 	Priẽ 'by', 'at', 'at the side of',	 	Kviẽsk visùs sė́sti priẽ stãlo
 	 	'in the presence of':	 	'Ask all (the guests) to sit down at the table'.
25.3 Dative
The primary function of the dative is that of the indirect object, e.g.:

Pagaliaũ jìs mán pasãkė teisýbę 'At last he told (to) me the truth'.
Šią̃ knỹgą paskýriau sàvo senẽliams 'I dedicated this book to my grandparents'.
In many cases, Lithuanian uses the indirect object where in English one uses expressions such as: 'for', 'for the sake of', etc.:

Draugaĩ Tòmui nupir̃ko šùnį
'Friends bought a dog for Thomas'.
The dative may also denote the subject of an impersonal clause, e.g.:

Mán trū́ksta išmintiẽs 'I lack wisdom'.
Jíem bùvo gẽra 'It was nice for both of them'.
The dative case may be used as the object of an infinitive to express purpose. In English we would have a direct object in a corresponding construction, e.g.:

Keliõnei nusipirkaũ naũją lagamìna 'I have bought a new suitcase for the journey'.
Kománda reñgėsi revánšui 'The team was preparing for the return game'.
It quite often indicates time, e.g.:

Sugrįžaũ tìk kelióms dienóms 'I came back only for a few days'.
Akìmirkai mẽs prarãdome žãdą 'For a moment we were deprived of speech'.

Lesson 6: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
The foundations for the flourishing of Lithuanian culture of the 18th century were laid in the previous two centuries. In the 16th and 17th centuries, a collective tradition for the production of religious and linguistic works had been created, and in Daniel Klein's grammar, norms for the written language had been codified. The distinguished literary historian Jùrgis Lebedỹs has emphasized that, without Jõnas Bretkū́nas, the greatest producer of religious literature at the end of the 16th century and the translator of the Bible, Kristijõnas Doneláitis (1714-1780) would never have become famous.

Kristijõnas Doneláitis as a poet was nurtured by the cultural milieu of 18th century East Prussia. At the age of 29 he was appointed pastor of the small East Prussian parish Tolminkiemis, where he lived until his death. He loved the simple and unhurried life. He had not only poetic talent, but also golden hands: he made optical and meteorological instruments and even built for himself a piano that he played, and he maintained a garden. A great part of his life was spent talking with the peasants of his parish and experiencing their woes and cares. Half the members of his parish were Germans who, supported by the government, tried to push Lithuanian peasants out of the more fertile lands. Thus, as a pastor, it frequently fell to his lot to quell national and social conflicts, encouraging the peasants to argue their cases in court.

It is thought that six fables belong to the initial phase of his literary activity. Some are borrowed from Aesop and others are original. However the most important work, which made him famous, is the poem Mẽtai 'The Seasons'. Most likely Doneláitis wrote this in the course of ten years without any preconceived plan for the work. The poem was constantly being supplemented and corrected, but remained unfinished to the end. The famous East Prussian Lithuanian cultural activist Liùdvikas Rėzà published it 38 years after its author's death. He was the first to call this work Mẽtai 'The Seasons'. This is made up of four parts: The amusements of spring, Summer work, The pleasures of fall and Winter cares. In these the author describes the East Prussian Lithuanian village, the way of life of its peasant inhabitants, and their work, all of which was well known to him. The impressive views of nature during the seasons described by the poet help to hold together the various parts of the work. The lives of the Lithuanian peasants in the poem are closely bound up with the cycles of nature. The most important things for the peasant are work, sleep and food. Doneláitis relied little on any kind of literary canons, but in the division of the poem's characters into positive (polite) and negative (good-for-nothing) persons we can see some elements of classical writing. The use of extravagant expressions and the tendency to hyperbolize are connected with the baroque tradition. In the work there are quite a few didactic precepts and pieces of advice, because its author is not only a poet but a preacher as well. In The Seasons, the author through the mouths of his characters comes out against the foreign German culture and emphasizes the value of his own language and culture. His national feeling is distinguished by conservatism.

The poetry of antiquity (Hesiod, Vergil) had a profound influence on him. His entire poem is in rhymed hexameter. Although the antique hexameter is based on the difference between short and long syllables, he applied it to the Lithuanian language, which has free stress, and he replaced the old hexameter with tonic hexameter. In his verses he alternates tonic dactyls and trochees, but the penultimate foot of a line is always dactylic. Characteristic of each line is a caesura in the third foot or two caesuras in the second and fourth feet. The caesura is for the most part masculine.

The episode given here is from the second part of The Seasons. Summer work tells about one of the most colorful good-for-nothing peasants of this poem, Plaučiū́nas. After a bit of unpaid collective work, he has his fill of food and drink at the place of his neighbor Kãsparas and wanders home, arriving only at dawn and without his new scythe and whetstone. He misses his tools only after the quail calls him to make hay. Unable to find his tools anywhere, Pliaučiū́nas beats his wife and children, saddles up his one-eared nag and rides off to Karaliáučius to buy a scythe. But there he forgets all about the scythe and at Mìkas' place pays for his drinks with his old nag and wanders home on foot after two weeks. Crawling and snorting, he cuts his neglected meadow with a sickle. This excerpt was translated by William Schmalstieg.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The text of the selection is given according to the rules of contemporary Lithuanian orthography and punctuation: as much as possible, an attempt has been made to maintain the authentic Donelaitis stress (he did not supply all the words with stress and some are stressed in several ways). In this selection as in the entire poem, abundant use is made of the half-participles, which are distinguished by their picturesque quality, e.g., klydinė́dams 'wandering around', miegódams 'sleeping', vaitódams 'groaning', pamatýdams 'seeing', žioplinė́dams 'gaping', šokinė́dams 'dancing', šnỹpšdams 'snorting', rėplinė́dams 'crawling'. Also characteristic of the author's language is the ending - s as a shortening of - as, i.e., the loss of mobile - a-, e.g., Plaučiū́ns, pavitóts 'having been given food and drink', miegódams 'sleeping', vaitódams 'groaning', etc. Infinitives are also shortened: šienáut(i) 'to make hay', pjáut(i) 'to cut, to reap', conjunctions ìk(i) 'until.' The locative ending -yje is shortened not to -y, but to yj, e.g.., naktỹj 'in the night'.

In the text given here Slavisms are encountered, e.g., pavitóts 'having been given food and drink', glū̃pas 'stupid, silly', nesvíetiškai 'not of this world, inhuman, beyond ordinary measure', dỹvas 'wonder', nedė́lė 'week', potám 'then'. Most common are the conjunctions kàd 'that, when', bèt 'but', ir̃ 'and', bei 'and'. Frequent in this excerpt are adverbs (paskiaũs 'afterwards, then', prastaĩ 'poorly', taĩp 'also', namõn 'home', daũg 'many, much', konè 'almost', etc.) and prepositions (pàs 'at', añt 'on', sù 'with', per̃ 'through', ìš 'from, out of', į̃ 'into', põ 'under, after', etc). In addition the adverb ir̃gi 'and even', characteristic of the literature of Lithuania Minor, is also used.

The excerpt is taken from the book Kristijonas Donelaitis. Metai ir pasakėčios. Vilnius: Baltų lankų leidyba, 2000, translated by William Schmalstieg.

Tàs nenáudėlis Plaučiū́ns, pàs Kãsparą pérnai
Talkojè pavitóts, taĩp baĩsiai bùvo prir̀ijęs,
Kàd jìs nãktyj, añt tamsių̃ laukų̃ klydinė́dams,
Bùdę naũją sù dalgiù šukė́tu prapùldė
Ir̃gi namõn išaũšus jaũ vos võs parsibãstė.
 Collapse All
tàs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
nenáudėlis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <nenáudėlis, nenáudėlė> good-for-nothing -- good-for-nothing
Plaučiū́ns -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Plaučiū́ns> Plauciunas -- Plauciunas
pàs -- preposition; <pàs> at, to -- at
Kãsparą -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Kãsparas> Kasparas -- Kasparas' (place)
pérnai -- adverb; <pérnai> last year -- last year
talkojè -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <talkà> collective labor -- in the collective labor
pavitóts -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle passive of <pavitóti, pavitója, pavitójo> entertain, give food and drink -- having been given food and drink
taĩp -- adverb; <taĩp> so, therefore -- so
baĩsiai -- adverb; <baĩsiai> awfully -- much
bùvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- had
prir̀ijęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <prirýti, prirỹja, prirìjo> drink -- drunk
kàd -- conjunction; <kàd> that -- that
jìs -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
nãktyj -- noun, feminine; locative singular <naktìs> night -- at night
añt -- preposition; <añt> in, on -- around
tamsių̃ -- adjective; genitive plural masculine of <tamsùs, tamsì> dark -- dark
laukų̃ -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <laũkas> field -- the fields
klydinė́dams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <klydinė́ti, klydinė́ja, klydinė́jo> wander -- wandering
bùdę -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <bùdė> whetstone -- the whetstone
naũją -- adjective; accusative singular feminine of <naũjas, naujà> new -- new
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- with
dalgiù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <dal̃gis> scythe -- the scythe
šukė́tu -- adjective; instrumental singular masculine of <šukė́tas, šukė́ta> chipped -- chipped
prapùldė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <prapùldyti, prapùldo, prapùldė> lose -- lost
ir̃gi -- adverb; <ir̃gi> and even -- and even
namõn -- adverb; <namõn> home -- home
išaũšus -- verb; preterit gerund(ive) of <išaũšti, išaũšta, išaũšo> break of dawn -- at the break of dawn
jaũ -- adverb; <jaũ> already, just -- just
vos võs -- adverb; <vos võs> barely -- barely
parsibãstė -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <parsibastýti, parsibãsto, parsibãstė> wander -- (he) wandered

Taĩp jisaĩ paskuĩ, per̃ diẽną vìsą miegódams,
Pàmestų rỹkų laukè ieškót neminė́jo,
Ìk põ mẽto vė̃l šienáut jaũ pùtpela šaũkė.
 Collapse All
taĩp -- adverb; <taĩp> so, therefore -- so that
jisaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
paskuĩ -- adverb; <paskuĩ> afterwards -- afterwards
per̃ -- preposition; <per̃> through -- through
diẽną -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <dienà> day -- the day
vìsą -- pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <vìsas, visà> all -- whole
miegódams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <miegóti, miẽga, miegójo> sleep -- sleeping
pàmestų -- verb; genitive plural masculine of preterit participle passive of <pamèsti, pàmeta, pàmetė> loose -- lost
rỹkų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <rỹkas> tool -- the tools
laukè -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <laũkas> field -- in the field
ieškót -- verb; infinitive of <ieškóti, íeško, ieškójo> look for -- to look for
neminė́jo -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <minė́ti, mìni, minė́jo> remember -- (he) didn't remember
ìk -- conjunction; <ìk> until -- until
põ -- preposition; <põ> after, over, on -- after
mẽto -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <mẽtai> year -- a year
vė̃l -- adverb; <vė̃l> again -- again
šienáut -- verb; infinitive of <šienáuti, šienáuja, šienãvo> make hay -- to make hay
jaũ -- adverb; <jaũ> already, just -- already
pùtpela -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <pùtpela> quail -- the quail
šaũkė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <šaũkti, šaũkia, šaũkė> call -- called (him)

Štaĩ Plaučiū́ns sàvo dal̃gio beĩ bùdės pasigẽdo
Ir̃ vaitódams vìs ir̃ šeñ, ir̃ teñ bėginė́jo;
Ìk paskiaũs, ìš pãpykio beržìnį pagãvęs,
Pãčią sù glūpaĩs vaikaĩs konè nùmušė smir̃das.
 Collapse All
štaĩ -- particle; <štaĩ> here -- so now
Plaučiū́ns -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Plaučiū́ns> Plauciunas -- Plauciunas
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- his
dal̃gio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <dal̃gis> scythe -- scythe
beĩ -- conjunction; <beĩ> and -- and
bùdės -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <bùdė> whetstone -- whetstone
pasigẽdo -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <pasigèsti, pasigeñda, pasigẽdo> miss -- missed
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
vaitódams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <vaitóti, vaitója,vaitójo> moan, groan -- groaning
vìs -- adverb; <vìs> still -- ...
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- ...
šeñ -- adverb; <šeñ> hither -- hither
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
teñ -- adverb; <teñ> there, thither -- thither
bėginė́jo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bėginė́ti, bėginė́ja, bėginė́jo> run about -- ran
ìk -- conjunction; <ìk> until -- until
paskiaũs -- adverb; <paskiaũs> then, after that -- finally
ìš -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
pãpykio -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <pãpykis> anger -- anger
beržìnį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <beržìnis> birch stick -- a birch stick
pagãvęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pagáuti, pagáuna, pagãvo> grab up -- grabbing up
pãčią -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <patì> wife -- (his) wife
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- and
glūpaĩs -- adjective; instrumental plural masculine of <glū̃pas> stupid -- stupid
vaikaĩs -- noun, masculine; instrumental plural of <vaĩkas> child -- (their) children
konè -- adverb; <konè> almost -- almost
nùmušė -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <numùšti, nùmuša, nùmušė> kill -- killed
smir̃das -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <smir̃das> stinking fellow -- the stinking fellow

Taĩp potám jisaĩ, nesvíetiškai prisidū̃kęs
Ir̃ vienaũsį kuĩnpalaikį prastaĩ pažebójęs,
Į̃ Karaliáučių dal̃gį pir̃kt tiesióg nukeliãvo.
 Collapse All
taĩp -- adverb; <taĩp> so, therefore -- so
potám -- adverb; <potám> then, after that -- then
jisaĩ -- definite pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- he
nesvíetiškai -- adverb; <nesviẽtiškai> inhuman, not of this world -- unholy
prisidū̃kęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active reflexive of <prisidū̃kti, prisidū́ksta, prisidū́ko> rage, raise a row -- in a fit of rage
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- ...
vienaũsį -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <vienaũsis, vienaũsė> one-eared -- one-eared
kuĩnpalaikį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <kuĩnpalaikis> old nag -- the old nag
prastaĩ -- adverb; <prastaĩ> badly -- somehow
pažebójęs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pažebóti, pažebója, pažebójo> bridle -- having bridled
į̃ -- preposition; <į̃> at, for, in, to -- for
Karaliáučių -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Karaliáučius> Karaliaucius -- Karaliaucius
dal̃gį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <dal̃gis> scythe -- a scythe
pir̃kt -- verb; infinitive of <pir̃kti, per̃ka, pir̃ko> buy -- to buy
tiesióg -- adverb; <tiesióg> directly -- directly
nukeliãvo -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <nukeliáuti, nukeliáuja, nukeliãvo> travel -- set off

Õ veĩ teñ, dỹvų visókių daũg pamatýdams
Ir̃ žioplinė́dams vìs beĩ bū̃riškai šokinė́dams,
Bùdę sù naujù dalgiù nusipir̃kt užsimir̃šo;
Bèt ir̃ kuĩnpalaikį taip jaũ pàs Mìką pragė́ręs,
Pė́sčias põ dviejų̃ nedė́lių võs parsibãstė,
Ir̃ sàvo píevą prìdergtą (tìkt gė́da sakýti)
Šnỹpšdams ir̃ rėplinė́dams vìs sù piáutuvu kir̃to.
 Collapse All
õ -- conjunction; <õ> and, but -- but
veĩ -- particle; <veĩ> look -- ...
teñ -- adverb; <teñ> there, thither -- there
dỹvų -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <dỹvas> miracle, wonder -- wonders
visókių -- pronoun; genitive plural masculine of <visóks, visókia> all -- marvelous
daũg -- adverb; <daũg> many, much -- many
pamatýdams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <pamatýti, pamãto, pamãtė> see -- seeing
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- ...
žioplinė́dams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <žioplinė́ti, žioplinė́ja, žioplinė́jo> gape -- gaping
vìs -- adverb; <vìs> still -- still
beĩ -- conjunction; <beĩ> and -- and
bū̃riškai -- adverb; <bū̃riškai> like a peasant -- like a peasant
šokinė́dams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <šokinė́ti, šokinė́ja, šokinė́jo> dance, skip -- dancing
bùdę -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <bùdė> whetstone -- a whetstone
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- and
naujù -- adjective; instrumental singular masculine of <naũjas, naujà> new -- new
dalgiù -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <dal̃gis> scythe -- a scythe
nusipir̃kt -- verb; infinitive reflexive of <nusipir̃kti, nusìperka, nusipir̃ko> buy -- to buy
užsimir̃šo -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <užsimir̃šti, užsimir̃šta, užsimir̃šo> forget -- (he) forgot
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- ...
kuĩnpalaikį -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <kuĩnpalaikis> old nag -- the old nag
taip jaũ -- adverb; <taip jaũ> also -- ...
pàs -- preposition; <pàs> at, to -- at
Mìką -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Mìkas> Mikas -- Mikas' (place)
pragė́ręs -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pragérti, pràgeria, pragė́rė> drink up -- having drunk up
pė́sčias -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <pė́sčias, pėsčià> on foot -- on foot
põ -- preposition; <põ> after, over, on -- after
dviejų̃ -- number; genitive feminine of <dù, dvì> two -- two
nedė́lių -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <nedė́lia> week -- weeks
võs -- particle; <võs> barely, hardly -- ...
parsibãstė -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <parsibastýti, parsibãsto, parsibãstė> wander -- (he) wandered (home)
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
sàvo -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- his
píevą -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <píeva> meadow -- field
prìdergtą -- verb; accusative singular feminine of preterit participle passive of <pridérgti, pridérgia, pridérgė> befoul -- befouled
tìkt -- particle; <tìkt> only -- only
gė́da -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <gė́da> shameful -- (it is) shameful
sakýti -- verb; infinitive of <sakýti, sãko, sãkė> say -- to say (it)
šnỹpšdams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <šnỹpšti, šnỹpščia, šnỹpštė> snort -- snorting
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
rėplinė́dams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <rėplinė́ti, rėplinė́ja, rėplinė́jo> crawl -- crawling
vìs -- adverb; <vìs> still -- over and over
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- with
piáutuvu -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <piáutuvas> sickle -- a sickle
kir̃to -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <kir̃sti, ker̃ta, kir̃to> cut -- harvested

Lesson Text
Tàs nenáudėlis Plaučiū́ns, pàs Kãsparą pérnai
Talkojè pavitóts, taĩp baĩsiai bùvo prir̀ijęs,
Kàd jìs nãktyj, añt tamsių̃ laukų̃ klydinė́dams,
Bùdę naũją sù dalgiù šukė́tu prapùldė
Ir̃gi namõn išaũšus jaũ vos võs parsibãstė.
Taĩp jisaĩ paskuĩ, per̃ diẽną vìsą miegódams,
Pàmestų rỹkų laukè ieškót neminė́jo,
Ìk põ mẽto vė̃l šienáut jaũ pùtpela šaũkė.
Štaĩ Plaučiū́ns sàvo dal̃gio beĩ bùdės pasigẽdo
Ir̃ vaitódams vìs ir̃ šeñ, ir̃ teñ bėginė́jo;
Ìk paskiaũs, ìš pãpykio beržìnį pagãvęs,
Pãčią sù glūpaĩs vaikaĩs konè nùmušė smir̃das.
Taĩp potám jisaĩ, nesvíetiškai prisidū̃kęs
Ir̃ vienaũsį kuĩnpalaikį prastaĩ pažebójęs,
Į̃ Karaliáučių dal̃gį pir̃kt tiesióg nukeliãvo.
Õ veĩ teñ, dỹvų visókių daũg pamatýdams
Ir̃ žioplinė́dams vìs beĩ bū̃riškai šokinė́dams,
Bùdę sù naujù dalgiù nusipir̃kt užsimir̃šo;
Bèt ir̃ kuĩnpalaikį taip jaũ pàs Mìką pragė́ręs,
Pė́sčias põ dviejų̃ nedė́lių võs parsibãstė,
Ir̃ sàvo píevą prìdergtą (tìkt gė́da sakýti)
Šnỹpšdams ir̃ rėplinė́dams vìs sù piáutuvu kir̃to.
Translation
That good-for-nothing Plauciunas, (having participated) last year in the collective labor and having been given food and drink at Kasparas' place, had drunk so much that, wandering around the dark fields at night, he lost his new whetstone and chipped scythe. He wandered home just barely at the break of dawn so that afterwards, sleeping through the whole day, he didn't remember to look in the field for his lost tools, until after a year the quail called him to make hay again. So now Plauciunas missed his scythe and whetstone and, groaning, ran hither and thither until finally, from anger, grabbing up a birch stick, the stinking fellow almost killed his wife and their stupid children. So then in a fit of unholy rage, having somehow bridled the old one-eared nag, he set off directly for Karaliaucius to buy a scythe. But seeing many marvelous wonders there, still gaping and dancing like a peasant, he forgot to buy a whetstone and a new scythe. But having drunk up the old nag [i.e., having spent all the money he got from selling the nag] at Mikas' place, he wandered home on foot after two weeks and harvested his befouled field (it's only shameful to say it) with a sickle, crawling and snorting over and over.
Grammar
26 Adverbs
Adverbs express qualitative, quantitive, spatial or temporal characteristics of actions, states, properties, sometimes of things. They can also denote the circumstances under which actions and states occur. Adverbs modify verbs, adjectives, adverbs and clauses, e.g.:

Kolegà rūgščiaĩ pàžvelgė į̃ manè 'My colleague glanced at me acidly'.
Keliõnė bùvo neįprastaĩ sunkì 'The trip was unusually difficult'.
Dažniáusiai visì darbaĩ užgriū̃va tuõ pačiù metù 'Most often all the jobs occur at the same time'.
Some qualitative adverbs can be used as predicatives, e.g.:

Mán labaĩ blogaĩ
'I feel extremely bad'.
It should be noted that some words function either as adverbs or as prepositions, e.g.:

Atsistók šalià 'Stand close'.
Atsistók šalià manę̃s 'Stand next to me'.
Most adverbs are formed from other parts of speech (nouns, adjectives, numerals, pronouns, participles) by means of suffixes or prefixes.

The suffix -(i)ai is particulary common and productive in Lithuanian. Adverbs with the suffix -(i)ai are formed from adjectives and participles with an adjectival meaning:

 	 	Adj/Part.	 	Adv
 	 	káršt-as 'hot'	 	karšt-aĩ 'hotly'
 	 	laimìng-as 'happy'	 	laimìng-ai 'happily'
 	 	aštr-ùs 'sharp'	 	aštr-iaĩ 'sharply'
 	 	mandag-ùs 'polite'	 	mandag-iaĩ 'politely'
 	 	nevỹkus-i 'unsuccessful'	 	nevỹkus-iai 'unsuccessfully'
 	 	dẽram-as 'proper'	 	deramaĩ 'properly'
 	 	neláukt-as 'unexpected'	 	nelauktaĩ 'unexpectedly'
Before the suffix -iai, the consonants t and d are replaced by č and dž:

 	 	Adj	 	Adv
 	 	skaud-ùs 'painful'	 	skaũdž-iai 'painfully
 	 	prìderant-i 'becoming, appropriate'	 	prìderanč-iai 'appropriately'
Adverbs formed by adding the suffix -yn denote a change into the condition denoted by the root adjective, e.g.:

 	 	Adj	 	Adv
 	 	šált-as 'cold'	 	šaltỹn '(turning, becoming) cold'
 	 	áukšt-as 'high, tall'	 	aukštỹn 'up', upwards'
A number of adverbs are adverbialized case forms of nouns, e.g.:

Case	 	Adv
Nominative	 	ganà 'enough', nežinià '(it) is not known'
Dative	 	ilgám 'for long', trumpám 'for a short while'
Accusative	 	trupùtį 'a little'
Instrumental	 	gretà 'side by side, next to somebody', tỹčia 'on purpose', draugè 'together', kar̃tais 'sometimes'
Locative	 	tarpùsavy 'between themselves'
The instrumental endings -(i)ui, -mis and -ais have developed into adverbial suffixes, e.g.:

véltui 'in vain'; pakeliuĩ 'on the way, the same way';
paskubomìs 'in a hurry'; apgraibomìs 'gropingly';
rẽtsykiais 'now and then'; dáiktais 'in places'.
The postpositional locative forms (the illative and the allative) are also used as adverbs, e.g.: šaliñ 'away, off', viršuñ 'up', vakaróp 'towards evening', velnióp 'to hell'. The adverbs namiẽ 'at home', artì 'near (by)', tolì 'far (away)' retain the archaic locative case form.

Numerous prepositional phrases have acquired adverbial meaning: iš kar̃to 'at once', bè gãlo 'extremely, on end' (lit. without end'), põ senóvei 'as of old, still', į̃ valiàs 'sufficiently'. Some of them lost case endings and developed into prefixed adverbs, e.g.: iškar̃t (cf: ìš kar̃to) 'at once', pernãkt (cf: per̃ nãktį) 'overnight', etc.

The following adverbs are adverbialized case forms of numerals, e.g., dvíese 'two by two', 'in twos'; trisè 'in a group of three'; vienaĩp 'in one way, in one manner'; antraĩp 'in another way, in a contrary manner'; trečiaĩp 'in a third way, in a third manner'.

The adverbs kur̃ 'where', kaĩp 'how', kíek 'how much, how many', kadà 'when', čià 'here', teñ 'there', visadà 'always', kitaĩp 'otherwise', etc. are related to pronouns. Their suffixes -(i)ur̃, -d(à) and -(i)ai~p can be used to form other adverbs, e.g., niekadà 'never', svetur̃ 'in a strange land (place)', vienur̃ 'in one place', savaip̃ 'in one's way', etc.

Some adverbs have developed from word groups, e.g., aną̃kart 'that time', kasdiẽn 'every day', šiẽmet 'this year'.

Words formed from verbs with the suffix -te, -tinai are traditionally considered to be non-finite verbal forms. They are called būdinỹs 'second infinitive'. However, in the newest Lithuanian grammars these forms are classed as adverbs, e.g.,

 	 	skrìs-ti 'to fly'	 	skris-tè 'flying'
 	 	skrìs-ti 'to fly'	 	skris-tinaĩ 'flying'
They are used with the verbs of the same root for emphasis. The suffix -tinaĩ is rare; tè is used instead, e.g.:

Čià žmõgų nukankìndavo, čiulptè iščiul̃pdavo jõ sveikãtą, jõ jėgàs. 'Here (they) used to torture a person, sucking (lit. sucking used to suck) dry his health, his energy'.
Astà skristè įskrìdo prõ durìs 'Asta came running fast (lit. flying flew) into the room'.
Adverbs deriving from adjectives which denote a variable property can form degrees of comparison. The comparative degree is formed by adding the suffix -iau while the superlative degree is derived by means of the suffix -iausiai or -iausia, e.g.:

 	 	Pos.	 	Comp.	 	Sup.
 	 	kãršt-aĩ 'hotly'	 	karšč-iaũ ' more hotly'	 	karšč-iáusiai 'the most hotly'
 	 	graž-iaĩ 'nicely'	 	gražiaũ 'more nicely'	 	gražiáusia(i) 'the most nicely'
The comparative and superlative forms of adverbs coincide with those of the respective neuter adjectives, cf: gražù '(it is) nice', gražiaũ 'nicer', gražiáusia 'the nicest'.

Adverbs can be divided into a few semantic types (adverbs of manner, place, time, cause, etc.), e.g.:

Išklausýk manè ramiaĩ 'Listen to me calmly'.
Apliñkui bùvo tùščia 'It was empty all around'.
Rudenióp oraĩ atšą̃la 'The weather gets colder towards autumn'.
27 Verbal Aspects and Transitivity
27.1 Verbal Aspects
Verbal aspect is that characteristic of the verb which shows whether the action has been completed or is still in progress. Two aspectual meanings are distinguished: perfective and imperfective. In Lithuanian the use of verbal aspect depends on three things, viz. the structure of the verb, its lexical meaning and tense.

The perfective meaning is mainly characteristic of prefixed verbs. Most prefixed verbs denote a completed action, especially in the preterit and future tenses, e.g.,

taĩsė '(he) was repairing': pataĩsė '(he) repaired, (he) has repaired'; výkdė '(he) was accomplishing': įvýkdė '(he) accomplished', (he) has accomplished'; pùvo '(it) was rotting': supùvo '(it) rotted, (it) has rotted'; nẽšė 'he was carrying': àtnešė 'he carried, he has carried'.

The following example illustrates the difference between the imperfective and the resultative perfective:

Tė̃vas ilgaĩ taĩsė kavõs aparãtą, bèt nesutaĩsė
'Father was (in the process of) repairing the coffee machine for a long time, but he did not manage to repair (it)'.
The prefix pa- is the most common prefix to give verbs perfective meaning. However, the addition of the iterative suffix -inėti makes such verbs imperfective again or perhaps neutral in regard to aspect:

àtnešė: atnešinė́jo 'he carried' (repeatedly);
nurãšė: nurašinė́jo 'he kept copying'.
As far as the lexical meaning of the verb is concerned, the punctual verbs and the verbs which denote a very short (momentary) action can only be perfective, e.g., ràsti 'to find', šáuti 'to shoot', šū́ktelėti 'to utter a cry', žvìlgterėti 'to casts a glance'.

The duration of the action is also important because we can only imagine a finished action in the past or the future. A finished action in the present would be in the past at the moment of utterance. Perfective verbs can then only be used with present tense endings in secondary functions. They may denote:

A general action which is not connected with any special time, e.g., Šiáurėje Lietuvà susisiẽkia sù Lãtvija 'In the North Lithuania borders on Latvia'. The possibility of performing an action, e.g., Màno tė́vas jaũ vė̃l paeĩna 'My father is able to walk again'. The historical present, e.g., Põ trẽčiojo Žečpospolìtos padalìjimo (1795) Rùsija prisijùngia didèsniąją Lietuvõs dãlį 'After the third partition of the Commonwealth (1795) Russia annexes (i.e. annexed) the greater part of Lithuania'. The future, e.g., Tuõj pàt važiúoju ir̃ parsìvežu jį̃ namõ 'I am going right now and bringing him home'.

The aspectual meaning of a verb may depend on the tense form and context. The present tense form of a verb is imperfective and the preterit and future tense forms are either perfective or imperfective according to context, e.g.:

Žmogùs mìršta (imperfective) 'A man is dying'.
Pérnai mìrė sesuõ (perfective) 'Sister died last year'.
Vaikaĩ mir̃s jū́sų akysè (imperfective) 'Children will be dying right before your eyes' (lit. 'in your eyes').
The imperfective aspect is most characteristic of unprefixed verbs. Among prefixed verbs, imperfective are those verbs which (a) are not used without prefixes or (b) the prefix of which changes or modifies their basic meaning, e.g.:

(a)	 	suprañta '(he) understands', pãsakoja '(he) relates', pajė̃gia '(he) is able', prieštaráuja '(he) objects', uždarbiáuja '(he) earns a living';
(b)	 	jaũčia '(he) feels': užjaũčia '(he) sympathizes (with)'; àpkalba '(he) slanders': kal̃ba '(he) speaks'; apgáuna '(he) deceives': gáuna '(he) gets'; sùtaria '(he) gets on (with someone): tãria '(he) says'; ìšlipa '(he) climbs off, out of': lìpa '(he) climbs'.
The suffixed verbs are usually imperfective (except -el(ė)ti, -er(ė)ti), cf: tráukti 'to pull': tráukyti 'to pull' (repeatedly); sùkti 'to twist': sukióti 'to twist' (repeatedly)'; rė̃kti 'to shout': rė́kauti 'to shout' (repeatedly); mèsti 'to throw': mė́tyti 'to throw, to fling' (repeatedly).

Some prefixed forms are neutral with respect to aspect. Their aspect depends on the context, e.g.:

Jìs tìk žvìlgterėjo mán į̃ véidą ir̃ iškar̃t manè prisìminė 'He only glanced up at my face and remembered me at once'.
Tù prisìminei manè visùs tuõs ìlgus issiskyrìmo metùs 'You remembered me after all those long years of separation'.
One should always remember that the various tenses of the verb can have different aspect.

It is important to distinguish carefully between the perfect tenses and the perfective aspect. A perfect tense denotes the state or condition which is the result of a past action, whereas the perfective aspect denotes a completed action. Thus the various perfect tenses may have verbs in either the perfective or imperfective aspect, e.g.:

Mẽs nè kar̃tą ẽsam skrìdę šiõs óro lìnijos lėktùvais (imperfective) 'We have flown with the planes of this airline many times'.
Kaĩ draudìmas skrìsti į̃ Bòstoną bùvo àtšauktas, mẽs jaũ bùvome isskrìdę į̃ Filadel̃fiją (perfective) 'By the time the ban on flights to Boston was cancelled we had already flown to Philadelphia'.
Although any combination of tense and aspect is theoretically possible, it is to be expected that the perfect tenses are more likely to be used with verbs of perfective aspect. This is because a condition which has been attained is more likely to be coupled with a completed action than with a noncompleted action.

27.2 Transitivity
Transitive verbs are used with the direct object in the accusative case. Intransitive verbs cannot take a direct object, cf.:

Visàs nereikalìngas kampúotas síenas ansaĩ prótėvis nugrióvė 'This ancestor destroyed all the unnecessary awkward walls'.
Vãkar jìs ìšsiuntė sàvo atsistatýdinimo prãšymą 'Yesterday he sent the application for his resignation'.
Vaikaĩ dažnaĩ bìjo tamsõs 'Children often are afraid of darkness'.
Kaĩ kuriẽ žmónes visuomèt džiaũgiasi kitų̃ žmonių̃ nesėkmėmìs 'Some people always rejoice at the misfortune of other people'.
There are some verbs that can be used as transitives or intransitives, e.g.:

Àš dár geraĩ girdžiù 'I still hear well'.
Àš pìrmą kar̃tą girdžiù šią̃ daĩną 'I am hearing this song for the first time'.
Pyrãgas jaũ kẽpa 'The cake is already baking.'
Renatà visuomèt kẽpa pyrãgą sàvo gimtãdieniui 'Renata always bakes a cake for her birthday'.
Many transitive verbs have intransitive counterparts. They can differ from each other in apophonic vowel alternation (a), the transitive verbs may take the causative suffixes -(d)inti, -(d)yti (b) or prefixes (c), the transitive counterpart is not reflexive (d):

(a)	 	Obel̃s Šakà nulū́žo 'The branch of the apple tree broke off'.
 	 	Vė́jas nuláužė obel̃s šãką 'The wind broke off the branch of the apple tree'.
(b)	 	Skruóstai dẽgė ìš gė́dos 'The cheeks burned with shame'.
 	 	Egzòtiški príeskoniai dẽgino bùrną 'The exotic spices burned the mouth'.
(c)	 	Dár vãkar àš drą̃siai ėjaũ tuõ keliù 'Yesterday I still went bravely on that road'.
 	 	Mẽs apė̃jome vìsą mìšką, bèt niẽko nerãdomè 'We went all over the forest but we found nothing'.
(d)	 	Prikélk manè aštuñtą vãlandą rýto 'Wake me up at eight in the morning'.
 	 	Laĩkas kéltis 'It is time to get up'.
28 Compound Tenses of the Passive Voice and Passivization.
28.1 The Compound Tenses of the Passive Voice
As was mentioned in lesson 5, the passive voice is formed with the auxiliary verb bū́ti 'to be'. There are as many tenses in the passive voice as there are tenses in the conjugation of the verb bū́ti. Since both the present passive and the past passive participle can be used to form the passive voice, there are actually always two tenses possible: one with the present passive participle (imperfect passive), the other with the past passive participle (perfect passive). The former is sometimes called the actional passive, and the latter the statal passive. One can render the tenses where the present passive participle is used into English as a regular passive, but with the word 'being' because the action is still being done (present tense), was being done (past tense), used to be being done (frequentative past), or will be being done (future). A sample paradigm of the imperfect passive tense is given below:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	('I am being invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš esù kviẽčiamas	 	àš esù kviečiamà
2nd sg	 	tù esì kviec̃^iamas	 	tù esì kviečiamà
3rd sg	 	jìs yrà kviẽčiamas	 	jì yrà kviečiamà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs ẽsam(e) kviečiamì	 	mẽs ẽsam(e) kviẽčiamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s ẽsat(e) kviečiamì	 	jū̃s ẽsat(e) kviẽčiamos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ yrà kviečiamì	 	jõs yrà kviẽčiamos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I was being invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš buvaũ kviẽčiamas	 	àš buvaũ kviečiamà
2nd sg	 	tù buvaĩ kviẽčiamas	 	tù buvaĩ kviečiamà
3rd sg	 	jìs bùvo kviẽčiamas	 	jì bùvo kviečiamà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bùvom(e) kviečiamì	 	mẽs bùvom(e) kviẽčiamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) kviečiamì	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) kviẽčiamos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùvo kviečiamì	 	jõs bùvo kviẽčiamos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I used to be (being) invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́davau kviẽčiamas	 	àš bū́davau kviečiamà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́davai kviẽčiamas	 	tù bū́davai kviečiamà
3rd sg	 	jìs bū́davo kviẽčiamas	 	jì bū́davo kviečiamà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) kviečiamì	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) kviẽčiamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) kviečiamì	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) kviẽčiamos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bū́davo kviečiamì	 	jõs bū́davo kviẽčiamos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I will be (being) invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́siu kviẽčiamas	 	àš bū́siu kviečiamà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́si kviẽčiamas	 	tù bū́si kviečiamà
3rd sg	 	jìs bùs kviẽčiamas	 	jì bùs kviečiamà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) kviečiamì	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) kviẽčiamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) kviečiamì	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) kviẽčiamos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùs kviečiamì	 	jõs bùs kviẽčiamos
Examples:

Mẽs ẽsam kviečiamì į̃ sàvo kolègos naujõs knỹgos pristãtymą 'We are being invited to the presentation of the new book of my colleague'.
Ketùri žmónės bùvo sužeistì per̃ avãriją Kū̃čių nãktį 'Four people were injured in an accident on Christmas Eve'.
The passive tenses with the past passive participles express the action as already complete, or completed, in any tense. Their paradigm is as follows:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	('I am invited, I have been invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš esù kviẽstas	 	àš esù kviestà
2nd sg	 	tù esì kviẽstas	 	tù esì kviestà
3rd sg	 	jìs yrà kviẽstas	 	jì yrà kviestà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs esam(e) kviestì	 	mẽs ẽsam(e) kviẽstos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s esat(e) kviestì	 	jū̃s ẽsat(e) kviẽstos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ yrà kviestì	 	jõs yrà kviẽstos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I was invited, I had been invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš buvaũ kviẽstas	 	àš buvaũ kviestà
2nd sg	 	tù buvaĩ kviẽstas	 	tù buvaĩ kviestà
3rd sg	 	jìs bùvo kviẽstas	 	jì bùvo kviestà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bùvom(e) kviestì	 	mẽs bùvom(e) kviẽstos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) kviestì	 	jū̃s bùvot(e) kviẽstos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùvo kviestì	 	jõs bùvo kviẽstos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I used to be invited, I would be invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́davau kviẽstas	 	àš bū́davau kviestà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́davai kviẽstas	 	tù bū́davai kviestà
3rd sg	 	jìs bū́davo kviẽstas	 	jì bū́davo kviestà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) kviestì	 	mẽs bū́davom(e) kviẽstos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) kviestì	 	jū̃s bū́davot(e) kviẽstos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bū́davo kviestì	 	jõs bū́davo kviẽstos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I will be invited, I will have been invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́siu kviẽstas	 	àš bū́siu kviestà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́si kviẽstas	 	tù bū́si kviestà
3rd sg	 	jìs bùs kviẽstas	 	jì bùs kviestà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) kviestì	 	mẽs bū́sim(e) kviẽstos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) kviestì	 	jū̃s bū́sit(e) kviẽstos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bùs kviestì	 	jõs bùs kviẽstos
Examples:

Mū́sų idė́jos nebùvo sùprastos 'Our ideas were not understood'.
Rytõj àš bū́siu prezideñto pasvéikintas sù pérgale 'Tomorrow I will be congratulated by the president on the victory'.
To form the subjunctive of the passive voice, the subjunctive forms of the verb bū́ti 'to be' are combined with the appropriate passive participle:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	('I would be (being) invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́čiau kviẽčiamas	 	àš bū́čiau kviečiamà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́tum kviẽčiamas	 	tù bū́tum kviečiamà
3rd sg	 	jìs bū́tų kviẽčiamas	 	jì bū́tų kviečiamà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́tume kviečiamì	 	mẽs bū́tume kviẽčiamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́tumėt(e) kviečiamì	 	jū̃s bū́tumėt(e) kviẽčiamos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bū́tų kviečiamì	 	jõs bū́tų kviẽčiamos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('I would be invited, I would have been invited')	 	 
1st sg	 	àš bū́čiau pàkviestas	 	àš bū́čiau pakviestà
2nd sg	 	tù bū́tum pàkviestas	 	tù bū́tum pakviestà
3rd sg	 	jìs bū́tų pàkviestas	 	jì bū́tų pakviestà
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́tume pakviestì	 	mẽs bū́tume pàkviestos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́tumėt(e) pakviestì	 	jū̃s bū́tumėt(e) pàkviestos
3rd pl	 	jiẽ bū́tų pakviestì	 	jõs bū́tų pakviestos
Examples:

Tù taĩp pàt bū́tum kviẽčiamas į̃ tàs vestuvès, jéi bū́tum jų̃ gimináitis 'You also would be (being) invited to that wedding if you had been their relative'.
Vaĩkas bū́tų apžiūrė́tas tuõj pàt, jéigu gýdytojas neturė́tų sunkių̃ ligónių 'The child would be examined immediately if the physician didn't have (more) serious patients'.
The passive imperative is formed with the imperative forms of the verb bū́ti 'to be' and the appropriate passive participle:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	('be respected')	 	 
2nd sg	 	tù bū́k ger̃biamas	 	tù bū́k gerbiamà
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́kim(e) gerbiamì	 	mẽs bū́kim(e) ger̃biamos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́kit(e) gerbiamì	 	jū̃s bū́kit(e) ger̃biamos
 	 	 	 	 
 	 	('be satisfied')	 	 
2nd sg	 	tù bū́k paténkintas	 	tù bū́k paténkinta
1st pl	 	mẽs bū́kim(e) paténkinti	 	mẽs bū́kim(e) paténkintos
2nd pl	 	jū̃s bū́kit(e) paténkinti	 	jū̃s bū́kit(e) paténkintos
One can form the passive forms with the compound tenses of bū́ti, e.g., àš esù bùvęs apkalbė́tas 'I have been slandered'; tù bū́tum bùvęs ìškviestas 'you would have been (being) called out'; mẽs ẽsam bùvę skriaudžiamì 'we have been harmed', etc.

Examples:

Irenà nè kar̃tą yrà bùvusi apkalbė́ta sàvo artimiáusių draugų̃ 'Irena more than once has been slandered by her closest friends'.
Mẽs bū́tume bùvę apgautì, jei tu nebū́tum mū́sų laikù įspė́jęs 'We would have been deceived if you had not warned us in time'.
The passive infinitive is formed with the infinitive of the verb bū́ti 'to be' and the appropriate passive participle in the dative case, e.g.:

Mán nepatìko bū́ti išnaudójamam 'I did not like to be exploited'.
Bū́ti apgautám sùkčių -- mãžas malonùmas 'To be deceived by swindlers is a small pleasure'.
28.2 Passivization
The active voice is represented in Lithuanian by all the simple finite verb forms, infinitive, active participles and the compound tenses with the active participles. The passive voice is represented by passive participles and the compound tenses with the present and past passive participles.

In the passive construction, the semantic subject is expressed by the genitive or it is omitted. Passive participles agree with the subject in number and case, cf:

Kaimýnai par̃davė šį̃ nãmą 'The neighbors sold this house'
Kaimýnai yrà pardãvę šį̃ nãmą 'The neighbors have sold this house'.
Šìs nãmas yrà kaimýnų pardúotas 'This house is sold by the neighbors'.
The accusative object of an active transitive verb is changed to the nominative subject in the passive construction, while the active subject is changed to the genitive agent. The same transformation is used for some verbs taking the genitive or dative object, e.g.:

Tavę̃s láukia draugaĩ 'Friends are waiting for you'.
Tù esì laukiamà draugų̃ 'You are awaited by friends'.
Polìcininkas įsãkė jíems sustóti 'The policeman ordered them to stop'.
Jiẽ bùvo įsakýti polìcininko sustóti 'They were ordered to stop by the policeman'.
In the latter instance the dative can be retained in the passive transformation, e.g.:

Jíems bùvo įsakýta polìcininko sustóti
'They were ordered to stop by the policeman'
(lit. 'To them it was ordered by the policeman to stop').
Constructions with the neuter forms of participles are possible, although they are not used frequently in Modern Lithuanian, e.g.:

Šìs nãmas yrà kaimýnų pardúota
'This house is sold by the neighbors'.
The neuter participles are mostly used with the pronouns unmarked for gender (e.g., kažkàs 'somebody' 'something'; vìskas 'everything') and adverbs or other words (e.g., daũg 'many, much'; mažaĩ 'few, little'; tū́kstantis 'thousand') with the genitive of quantity, e.g.:

Kažkàs čià taĩsoma 'Something is being repaired here'.
Išgélbėta bùvo tū́kstančiai žmonių̃ 'Thousands of people were saved'.
Intransitive verbs have passive forms only with the neuter participles, e.g.:

Jìs bė́go šiuõ siaurù takeliù 'He was running on this narrow path'.
Jõ bė́gta šiuõ siaurù takeliù 'He must have run on this narrow path'.
Čià stovė́jo màno nãmas 'My house stood here'.
Čià màno nãmo stovė́ta 'My house must have stood here'.
29 Use of the Accusative, Instrumental and Locative
29.1 Accusative
The accusative is primarily the case of the direct object. All regular transitive verbs require the accusative case, e.g.:

Kiekvíeną rùdenį mẽs sodìname medžiùs sàvo sodè 'Every fall we plant trees in our garden'.
Pamėgìnk jám užčiáupti bùrną 'Try to shut his mouth'.
The accusative can express certain periods of time, such as the day of the week, the month, the season:

Vãsarą Lietuvojè dažnì líetūs 'In summer rain storms are frequent in Lithuania'.
Líepą bū̃na šilčiáusios diẽnos 'The warmest days are in June'.
Penktãdienį pavėlavaũ į̃ tráukinį 'On Friday I was late for the train.'
The accusative case may denote definite time, limited time, or duration of time:

Pótvynis prasidė́jo nãktį 'The flood started at night'.
Dvì saváites negalė́jau kójos iš namų̃ iškélti 'Two weeks I could not leave my home even for a short period' (lit. '...could not put my foot out of the house').
Nesutarìmai tę̃sėsi visùs metùs 'Disagreements lasted the entire year'.
It is also used with kàs to denote 'each, every':

Kàs vãlandą skam̃binau bróliui tikė́damasis gáuti gerų̃ žiniũ
'Every hour I called my brother hoping to get the good news'.
Many prepositions govern the accusative case. The most frequent are:

Apiẽ 'around, about, near, approximately, concerning': Papãsakok mán daugiaũ apiẽ savè 'Tell me more about yourself'.
Apliñk 'around, by': Apliñk manè susibū́rė màno rėmė́jai 'My supporters gathered round me'.
Į̃ 'in, into, to': Mẽs visì ẽsam įsipáinioję į̃ šį̃ nemalõnų reĩkalą 'We have all become involved in this unpleasant affair'.
Per̃ 'through, across', during, throughout': Linksmýbės tę̃sėsi per̃ vìsą nãktį 'Merriment lasted the whole night'.
Põ 'here and there, round about', in, on, over': Kiekvíenas užsisãkėm põ bùtelį alaũs 'We each ordered a bottle of beer apiece'. Rytaĩs braidžiodavau po rasótą žõlę 'In the morning I used to walk about on the dewy grass'.
Priẽš 'before, in the presence of, ago, against': Niẽkad neĩsiu priẽš sàvo są́žinę 'I will never go against my conscience'.
Prõ 'by, past, through': Simonà praė̃jo prõ šãlį nė̃ nepasisvéikinusi 'Simona passed by without even saying hello'.
Ùž 'than, for, in return for': Nepyk añt jõ už tą̃ nekal̃tą mẽlą 'Do not be angry with him for the fib' (lit. '...for the harmless lie)'.
The preposition põ can be used with the genitive case (when it means 'after'), with the accusative case (when it means 'here and there, round about') or with the instrumental case (when it means 'under').

The preposition ùž can be used with the genitive case (when it means 'in, after') or with the accusative case (when it means '(in return) for').

29.2 Instrumental
The instrumental case may denote the means with which something is done, e.g.:

Žaisdamì fùtbolą vaikaĩ kãmuoliu patáikė į̃ lángą 'The children hit the window with the ball while playing football'.
Neketinù važiúoti automopbiliù, skrendù lėktuvù 'I am not going to go by bus, I am flying by plane'.
In place of the instrumental case by itself, the preposition sù may also be used with the instrumental:

Žaisdamì fùtbolą vaikaĩ sù kãmuoliu patáikė į̃ lángą 'The children hit the window with the ball while playing football'.
Neketinù važiúoti sù automopbiliù, skrendù sù lėktuvù 'I am not going to go by bus, I am flying by plane'.
The instrumental may be used to indicate the place along which or through which something or somebody is moving, e.g.:

Dangumì skríejo baltì debesė̃liai
'The white small clouds were flying through the sky'.
It may also be used in certain expressions of time. The instrumental plural may imply that something happens repeatedly or regularly at a certain time:

Saváitgaliais mẽs visuomèt žaĩdžiam brìdžą
'On weekends we always play bridge'.
Many fossilized expressions of time are actually old instrumental case forms (see section 26).

Certain verbs require a direct object or an indirect complement in the instrumental case, e.g.:

Visà kománda džiaũgiasi praė̃jusių mẽtų pérgalėmis 'The whole team rejoices at the victories of the last year'.
Supỹkęs pavadinaũ jį̃ ãsilu 'Having got angry, I called him an ass'.
The instrumental case may denote the condition or profession. Such constructions may be found with the verbs vir̃sti 'to turn into, to become', dė́tis 'to pretend to be', laikýti 'to consider...as', skìrti 'to name, to appoint', gìmti 'to be born', áugti 'to grow (into)', tàpti 'to become', etc.:

Jìs dẽdasi màno draugù 'He pretends to be my friend'.
Vãkar Sìlvija bùvo paskirtà komìsijos pìrmininke 'Yesterday Silvia was appointed the chairwoman of the commission'.
As a predicate the instrumental may be used with the verb bū́ti 'to be', especially when it is close in meaning to tàpti 'to become'. The Lithuanian standard grammars indicate that the nominative denotes a constant characteristic of the subject, whereas the instrumental denotes an accidental or temporary condition, e.g.:

Màno tė́vas yrà architèktas, õ àš bū́siu (tàpsiu) žurnalistù (žurnalìstas) 'My father is an architect and I will be (become) a journalist'.

However, this rule is not always reflected in spoken Lithuanian.

The nominative is most common as predicate of the verb bū́ti 'to be', whereas with the other verbs mentioned above the predicate is in the instrumental. But the instrumental may be used as a predicate of bū́ti 'to be' when it means approximately the same as tàpti 'to become'.

The instrumental case may be used as the object of certain prepositions, e.g.:

Sù 'with': Gál galì supažìndinti mùs sù sàvo tėvaĩs? 'Can you introduce us to your parents?'
Põ 'under': Põ páltu jì vilkė́jo tìk plóną suknẽlę 'She wore only a thin dress under the coat'.
Sulìg 'up to, as far as': Sniẽgo pripùstė sulìg var̃tais 'There were drifts of snow up to the gate'.
Tiẽs 'opposite': Bìtė sùko ratùs tiẽs màno nósimi 'The bee was circling round opposite my nose'.
29.3 Locative
The locative case is used primarily to indicate location, e.g.:

Apsigyvẽnome miẽsto centrè 'We stayed downtown'.
Gulė́jau rugių̃ laukè ir̃ žiūrė́jau į̃ dañgų 'I was lying in the field of rye and looking at the sky'.
It is also used in certain expressions of time, e.g.:

Vidùrdieny pasidãrėbaĩsiai káršta 'It got terribly hot at noon'.
Visì tìkimės, kàd ateityjè bùs geriaũ 'We all expect that it will be better in the future'.
The postpositional locative forms, viz. the illative, the allative and the adessive, are not common in modern Lithuanian.

30 Conjunctions and Particles
30.1 The Conjunctions
Conjunctions are of two types, coordinating conjunctions and subordinating conjunctions. With regard to form, conjunctions are divided into simple (e.g., ir̃ 'and', kàd 'that', ar̃ 'or') and complex (e.g., õ vìs dėltõ 'but still', võs tìk 'as soon as', kàd ir̃ 'though').

The words ir̃ 'and', õ 'and, but', bèt 'but', tačiaũ 'but, nevertheless, however', ar̃ 'or', ar̃ ... ar̃ 'either ... or', arbà 'or', arbà ... arbà 'either ... or', neĩ ... neĩ 'neither ... nor', beĩ 'and', etc. are coordinating conjunctions and can connect either clauses, phrases or single words:

Taĩgi knygà prabỹla lietùviškai, ir̃ nè bèt_kaĩp, õ eiliúotai 'Thus the book speaks Lithuanian, and not any kind, but rhymed'.
Žõdžiai arbà nè vìską tepasãko, arbà per_daũg pasãko ir̃ atvėsìna vìdų 'Words either don't say everything or they say too much and make the insides cold'.
In general õ and bèt are similar in usage, but bèt is more emphatic, e.g.:

Bèt tenaĩ -- visì lýgūs. Õ čià -- niẽkur niẽko! Jokiõs prasmė̃s! 'But there - - everyone is equal. And here - - nothing anywhere! No meaning!'
Gimináičiai ketìno paviešė́ti dvì saváites, bèt (õ, tačiaũ) išvỹko tìk põ trijų̃ 'The relatives were going to stay with us two weeks, but (however) they left only after three weeks'.
Bèt may be replaced by tačiaũ especially after negative clauses. The clause introduced by bèt also denote in some cases something which is unexpected in view of the meaning of the main clause:

Visì susižval̃gė, bèt (tačiaũ) niẽkas neìštarė nė̀ žõdžio
'All exchanged glances, but nobody said even a word'.
Tačiau is more limited to formal discourse, whereas bèt is common in every day conversation. There are also such complex conjunctions as õ vìs dėltõ 'but still', õ vìs tíek, bèt vìs tíek 'but even so', õ tačiau 'but however':

Niẽkas nesitikė́jo, kàd jìs gãli laimė́ti šiàs varžýbas, õ vìs dėltõ jám pavỹko
'Nobody expected that he could win this competition, but he succeeded'.
The conjunction beĩ 'and' can unite two closely related words or phrases. Sometimes preference is given to beĩ to avoid repetition of ir̃:

Objèktas lietùvių kalbojè dažniáusiai réiškiamas galininkù ir̃ kilmininkù, rečiaũ naudininkù beĩ į́nagininku
'In Lithuanian the object is usually expressed by the accusative or the genitive case, more rarely by the instrumental or the dative case'.
Beĩ is especially popular in contemporary journalistic and scientific style.

The subordinating conjunctions kàd 'that', jóg 'that', kadángi 'because, for', nès 'because', jéi(gu) 'if', nórs 'although', nórs ir̃ 'though, even if', kàd ir̃ 'although', etc. express the relation of subordination between clauses:

Tìk bókštas pasilìko, nórs jõ taip_jaũ nebereikė́jo 'Only the tower remained, although that was also no longer necessary'.
Kàd ir̃ labaĩ norė́tum, negáutum 'Even if you would like (it) a lot you would not get (it)'.
Jéi(gu) visì ateĩtų, gãli neužtèkti viẽtos 'If everybody came there would not be enough space (for all)'.
The archaic idañt 'in order (that)' is used rarely. Kadángi 'because' is limited to formal discourse (preference is given to nès). Generally it is found as the first word of a sentence:

Kadángi šì informãcija bùvo gautà per̃ vėlaĩ, jì nebùs isspáusdinta rýtdienos laĩkrastyje
Šì informãcija nebùs išspáusdinta rýtdienos laĩkraštyje, nès jì gautà per̃ vėlaĩ
Since this information was received too late, it will not be published in tomorrow's newspaper'.
The subordinating conjunction kàd is polyfunctional. It may subordinate different types of subordinate clauses:

Bèt bókštas ir̃ šiañdien dár nežìno, kàd jìs nebereikalìngas 'But the tower even today doesn't realize that it is no longer necessary'.
Šiañdien jõ plyšiúotos síenos nè tám, kàd lietùviai, čià pasislė̃pę, šáudytų sàvo strėlėmìs į̃ neàtmušamus príešus 'Today its fissured walls are not there for Lithuanians, who, hidden here, could shoot their arrows at unstoppable enemies'.
suklýdau dė̃l tõ, kàd suabejójau savimì 'I made a mistake because I entertained doubts about myself'.
Jóg is mostly used as a synonym of kàd:

Paprašiaũ, kàd jìs visíems primiñtų, jóg (kàd) reĩkia pasiim̃ti maĩsto
'I asked him to remind everybody about taking some food'.
Pronouns and adverbs are also used to connect clauses, e.g.:

Baĩsūs bùvo kitì naikìnimo lãgeriai, kur̃, bū́davo, àtveža kãlinį ir̃ tuojaũ nužùdo 'The other extermination camps, where they brought in a prisoner and immediately killed (him), were atrocious, too'.
Dabar̃ niẽkas negãli tiksliaĩ pasakýti, ką̃ galvójo mū́sų próteviai gárbindami ą́žuolus 'Today nobody can tell exactly what our ancestors were thinking about while worshiping oaks'.
30.2 The Particles
A great number of various particles are used in Lithuanian. They give modal or emotional emphasis to other words, or word groups, or clauses. Some of them have several meanings, e.g., tìk limits, singles out, or intensifies the meaning of a word:

Ìš šiõs kebliõs padėtiẽs išsisùkti pavỹko tìk Sìmui 'Only Simas succeeded in getting out of this embarrassing situation'.
Àš tìk truputė̃lį pamąstýsiu ir̃ apsisprę́siu 'I will think only a little bit and will decide'.
Tìk pamėgìnk vė̃l teñ nueĩti! 'Just you try to go there again!'
With respect to their structure, particles may be simple (e.g., jaũ 'already', dár 'yet', vė̃l 'again'), compound (e.g., konè 'almost', ar̃gi 'really', nebeñt 'if only'), or complex (e.g., kad_ir̃ 'even', ar_nè 'isn't it', víen_tik 'just only').

A number of particles have the same form as conjunctions (e.g., kàd 'that', ir̃ 'and'), adverbs (e.g., čià 'here', taĩp 'thus, so') or pronouns (e.g., sáu, kuõ 'what'):

Õ jì visái niẽko sáu 'She is not so bad'.
Katė̃ kàd šõks añt jõ 'The cat suddenly jumped on him'.
The negative and the interrogative particles were discussed in Lesson 2 and Lesson 3.

The most popular specifying and limiting particles are bevéik 'almost', per̃ 'too', võs 'hardly', dár 'yet', jaũ 'already', nèt 'even', vė̃l 'again', pàt 'right', tìk 'only' etc., e.g.:

Õ trečiàsis galimùmas tuõ metù jám bùvo dár tìk pradė́jęs aiškė́ti 'But at that moment the third possibility just began to become clear'.
Šiañdien jaũ niẽkam nebereĩkia tõ bókšto sargýbos 'Today nobody needs the protection of that tower any more'.
Tìk bókštas pasilìko, nórs jõ taip_jaũ nebereikė́jo 'Only the tower remained, although that was also unnecessary'.
Comparative particles lýg 'like, as if', tar̃si, tarýtum, tar̃si 'as if, as though' express comparison and doubt at the same time, e.g.:

Õ taĩ gir̃disi lýg kàd sẽnis švepliótų 'But it sounds like a lisping old man'.
Jám tar̃si atsivė́rė ãkys 'It seemed as if his eyes opened'.
There are two optative particles tegù(l) and tè 'let', e.g.:

Tegù visùs jùs lỹdi sėkmė̃ 'May success accompany all of you'.
Tegùl jìs pasãko, kõ ìš tikrų̃jų nóri 'Let him say what he really wants'.
Emphatic particles gì, jùk, ir are used to emphasize a word or clause, e.g.:

Bèt mẽs gì niẽko nežinójome 'But we still knew nothing'.
Jùk taĩ ir̃ bè žõdžių áišku 'But that is clear without words'.
Ir̃ jū̃s čià ẽsat įveltì 'Even you are involved here'.

Lesson 7: Lithuanian
Virginija Vasiliauskiene and Jonathan Slocum
Jonas Bretkunas (1536-1602) was born in East Prussia, but he did not come from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania like Mazvydas and Vilentas. In his origin Bretkunas reflects the complicated history of this region. It is thought that his mother was an Old Prussian (i.e. of Baltic origin), but that his father was most likely a German. Since Jonas Bretkunas knew well the local languages of the region, not yet having finished his studies in Wittenberg he was appointed pastor in the small town of Labguva and after 25 years was transferred to Karaliaucius (= Koenigsberg, nowadays called Kaliningrad and located in the Russian Federation) where he managed to finish and publish the religious books which he had prepared. Bretkunas was not a man of narrow interests. He also collected ethnographic material about East Prussia and wrote the history of the region.

His most important work, however, is his translation of the Bible into Lithuanian. Fate was not kind, however, to this work. Once Protestantism had become established in East Prussia, the Lithuanians' attention to religious writings waned and this important contribution to Lithuanian literature and culture was not published. In translating the Bible, Bretkunas could not rely on any grammar or dictionary, and a good knowledge of the spoken language couldn't always help him translate abstract concepts. He frequently had to create neologisms, e.g., trivienýbė 'trinity' (cf: trejýbė), and long and patiently hunt for the most appropriate word. In the margins of the Bible translation we run across many synonyms.

Bretkunas was the first to prepare religious texts on the basis of the southern variant of the Western High Lithuanian dialect, although adapting himself to the tradition of earlier religious writings he did not stick consistently to this dialect. In the middle of the 17th century the aforementioned dialect was codified in Daniel Klein's grammar and people began to use it in all the East Prussian publications and at the end of the 19th century the standard Lithuanian language began to be formed on the basis of this dialect. Thus Bretkunas' written language is connected directly to the contemporary Lithuanian language.

In Bretkunas' written language here and there we encounter long a in place of the contemporary language long o, e.g., áras 'whether' (cf. óras), in word initial position e and a may be exchanged, e.g., e\s^ (a\s^) 'I,' etc. At the same time there was a rather strong nasal resonance which is either omitted in the printed books or else is rendered by the diphthongs an, en, in, un, e.g., lìkens 'having remained' (cf.: lìkęs). Of the Samogitian (Zemaitish, Low Lithuanian) elements encountered in his writings either from the tradition of religious writings or from local dialects one can mention the forms without affrication, e.g., dideĩ 'largely' (cf. didžiaĩ), the imperative with the suffix ke, e.g., atmiñkem 'let us remember' (cf.: atmiñkim), the dropping of short endings tùr 'has, have (to)' (cf.: tùri) etc. Bretkunas' texts are rich in archaic case forms, e.g., dat.sg. mùmus (cf: mùms), athematic verbs, e.g., ateĩt(i) 'comes' (cf: ateĩna), syntactic constructions especially with participles, e.g., Gir̃dim schìcze Põna Krìstu iñg Jerùsalem añt Aslíczios ir assiláiczio raĩta atẽiusi 'We hear (that) this master Christ (having) arrived in Jerusalem riding on an ass and a small foal.' Bretkunas uses a fair number of archaic words, e.g., apýpenai 'poison' (cf: nuodaĩ), draugalà 'lover', (cf: meilùžė), penùkšlas 'food' (cf: maĩstas). There aren't many Germanisms in his sermons and translations, e.g., ver̃delis 'island' (cf: salà), but there is a rather abundant stratum of Slavisms and they are especially frequent in the naming of religious concepts, e.g. prarãkas 'prophet' (cf: prãnašas), vierà 'faith' (cf: tikė́jimas), etc. There are also some Old Prussian words, e.g., bùtas 'house' (cf: nãmas).

Reading and Textual Analysis
Bretkunas' huge book of sermons, published in 1591, is written in an uncomplicated folk style. The excerpt given here comes from p. 57 of this book. In it Bretkunas explains the miracle of Christ's birth. Even while remaining a virgin Mary bears Christ. This is a difficult matter to understand not only for humans, but also for the angels. However such was the will of God which he expressed through the prophet Isaiah.

The rules for writing 16th century Lithuanian in East Prussia were significantly different from the contemporary rules. All books were printed in the Gothic script. Long vowels were not marked, e.g., kúno (cf: kū́no) 'body's', irà (cf: yrà) 'is, are', after short vowels two consonants were frequently written as in German, e.g., nussistebeti (cf: nusistebė́ti) 'to be surprised'. Again as in German, sch was written for š. Many nouns were written with capital letters. Among other orthographic features one must mention cz for č. j was written several ways: gh, i, j; uo was written as u with a diacritic mark resembling a small circle written above it; v was written as w. For the nasalized letters either the diphthongs an, en, in, un were written or else the nasalized sounds were not marked, e.g., acc. sg. Krìstu (cf: Krìstų) 'Christ', pranẽschens (cf: pranẽšęs) 'having prophesied'. Sometimes there is no marker of softness before back vowels, e.g., schos 'these' (cf: šiõs). ė is never written; in its place, e is always used. Many of the orthographic rules mentioned here were not consistently observed.

In the text given here, short final vowels are frequently dropped, e.g., bilódams 'saying', negãl 'cannot', tùr 'has, have'. Long final vowels are shortened, e.g., bùwa (cf: bùvo) 'was, were', pagim̃da (cf: pagim̃do) 'bears, gives birth', sàwa (cf: sàwo) 'one's own', etc. The longer forms of conjunctions and adverbs are used, e.g., nèsa 'because', teipõ 'thus'. There is one athematic verb passiliẽkt (cf: pasiliẽka) 'remains, remain', and there are also words affected by dialect phonetics teĩp (cf: taĩp) 'yes', teipõ (cf: taipõ) 'so', èsch (cf: àš) 'I'. Characteristic of this excerpt as of other writings of this region is the appearance of ė stem nouns in place of the io stem, e.g., vãle (cf: valià) 'will', dvãse (cf: dvasià) 'soul'. Likewise many Slavisms are encountered, e.g., dĩwas 'miracle', prarãkas 'prophet', suwenczawóti 'to marry, to join together', czĩstas 'pure', dabótis 'to observe, to pay attention to', ischrakúoti 'to comprehend', words created on the Slavic model (so-called calques), e.g., sunkì 'heavy' for nėščià 'pregnant,' nezinnóti (cf: nepažìnti) 'not to know, not to recognize'. Among the syntactic characteristics the accusative cum participio construction must be mentioned, e.g., ...ìsch schõs històrios atmiñk, Krìstu zmogumì gìmusi ìsch giminnẽs karãliu 'from this story remember, Christ having been born from his ancestry a king, i.e., that Christ was born a king'. The use of the postpositional modifier is frequent, e.g., karalĩstes iõ 'his kingdom', dárbo Schwentõs Dwãses 'of the work of the Holy Spirit', mergà czistà 'pure virgin', põ pagim̃dimo sàwa 'after her giving birth', etc.

Taĩp tataĩ nũ añt añtro sáw ìsch schõs històrios atmiñk, Krìstu zmogumì gìmusi ìsch gimminẽs karãliu, bútent Dówido, nèsa ir̃ tataĩ Diẽwas teipõ bùwa lìkens ir̃ prannẽschens pacziám Karãlui Dówidui bilódams.
 Collapse All
taĩp -- particle; <taĩp> so, therefore -- therefore
tataĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- this
nũ -- adverb,; <nū̃> now -- now
añt -- preposition; <añt> in, on -- in
añtro -- number; genitive singular masculine of <añtras, antrà> other -- the second (chapter)
sáw -- pronoun; dative of <savę̃s> oneself, itself -- for yourself
ìsch -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
schõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <šìs, šì> this -- this
històrios -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <istòrija> history -- story
atmiñk -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <atmiñti, àtmena, àtminė> remember -- remember
Krìstu -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Krìstus> Christ -- Christ
zmogumì -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- as a man
gìmusi -- verb; accusative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <gìmti, gìmsta, gìmė> be born -- having been born
ìsch -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
gimminẽs -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <giminė̃> lineage -- (his) lineage
karãliu -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <karãlius> king -- of kings
bútent -- conjunction; <bū́tent> namely -- namely
Dówido -- proper noun, masculine; genitive plural of <Dóvydas> David -- of David
nèsa -- conjunction; <nèsa> because -- because
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- ...
tataĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- this
Diẽwas -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Diẽvas> God -- God
teipõ -- particle; <teipõ> also -- also
bùwa -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- had
lìkens -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <lìkti, líeka, lìko> remain -- remained
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
prannẽschens -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pranèšti, pràneša, prànešė> announce, inform -- prophesied
pacziám -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <pàts, patì> himself -- himself
Karãlui -- noun used as title; dative singular masculine of <Karãlius> King -- King
Dówidui -- proper noun, masculine; dative singular of <Dóvydas> David -- David
bilódams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <bylóti, bylója, bylójo> say -- saying

Èsch tàwa Sékla pãskui tawè prikélsiu, kurì ìsh tàwa kúno turẽs ateĩti, ir̃ tõs karalĩste èsch patwìrtinsiu, beĩ karalĩstes iõ nè bùs gãlo.
 Collapse All
èsch -- pronoun; nominative singular of <àš> I -- I
tàwa -- pronoun; genitive singular of <tù> you -- your
Sékla -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <sė́kla> seed -- seed
pãskui -- conjunction; <pãskui> after -- after
tawè -- pronoun; accusative singular of <tù> you -- you
prikélsiu -- verb; 1st person singular future of <prikélti, prìkelia, prikė́lė> raise -- will raise
kurì -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- which (seed)
ìsh -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
tàwa -- pronoun; genitive singular of <tù> you -- your
kúno -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kū́nas> body -- body
turẽs -- verb; 3rd person future of <turė́ti, tùri, turė́jo> have -- shall
ateĩti -- verb; infinitive of <ateĩti, ateĩna, atė̃jo> come -- come
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
tõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- of this (seed)
karalĩste -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <karalỹstė> kingdom -- the kingdom
èsch -- pronoun; nominative singular of <àš> I -- I
patwìrtinsiu -- verb; 1st person singular future of <patvìrtinti, patvìrtina, patvìrtino> confirm -- will confirm
beĩ -- conjunction; <beĩ> and -- and
karalĩstes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <karalỹstė> kingdom -- to (this) kingdom
iõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <jìs, jì> he, she, it -- of his (seed)
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- no
bùs -- verb; 3rd person future of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- (there) will be
gãlo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <gãlas> end -- end

Bèt schìcze dĩwu dĩwai irà Marià, kurì dabar̃ sù wiru nè bùwa suwenczawóta, kuriõs wirìschkis nepakrùtina, kurì wíro nezinnóia, kaĩp tà ìsch dárbo Schwentõs Dwãses nieschczià álba sunkì rañdasi ir̃ bernẽli pagim̃da.
 Collapse All
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
schìcze -- adverb; <šìčia> here -- here
dĩwu -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <dỹvas> miracle, wonder -- of miracles
dĩwai -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <dỹvas> miracle, wonder -- the miracle
irà -- verb; 3rd person present of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- is
Marià -- proper noun, feminine; nominative singular of <Marijà> Mary -- Mary
kurì -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- who
dabar̃ -- adverb; <dabar̃> now -- yet
sù -- preposition; <sù> with -- ...
wiru -- noun, masculine; instrumental singular of <výras> man, husband -- a man
nè -- particle; <nè> no, not -- not
bùwa -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- had
suwenczawóta -- verb; nominative singular feminine of preterit participle passive of <suvenčiavóti, suvenčiavója, suvenčiavójo> marry -- married
kuriõs -- pronoun; genitive singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- whom
wirìschkis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <vyrìškis> man, husband -- the man
nepakrùtina -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <krùtinti, krùtina, krùtino> touch -- had not touched
kurì -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <kurìs, kurì> which, who -- who
wíro -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <výras> man, husband -- a man
nezinnóia -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person preterit of <žinóti, žìno, žinójo> know -- had not known
kaĩp -- adverb; <kaĩp> how -- how
tà -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- she
ìsch -- preposition; <ìš> from -- from
dárbo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <dárbas> work, action -- the action
Schwentõs -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <šveñtas, šventà> holy -- Holy
Dwãses -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <dvãsė> Ghost -- of the ... Ghost
nieschczià -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <nėščià> pregnant -- pregnant
álba -- conjunction; <álba> or -- or
sunkì -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <sunkùs, sunkì> heavy -- heavy
rañdasi -- verb; 3rd person present reflexive of <ràstis, rañdasi, rãdosi> become -- becomes
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
bernẽli -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <bernẽlis> child -- a child
pagim̃da -- verb; 3rd person present of <pagimdýti, pagim̃do, pagim̃dė> bear -- bears

Tõ sakaũ newíena zmogaũs prõtas negãl, pérmaniti ir̃ ischrakúoti.
 Collapse All
tõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- this
sakaũ -- verb; 1st person present singular of <sakýti, sãko, sãkė> say -- (I) say
newíena -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <nė víenas, nė vienà> not one -- not one
zmogaũs -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- of... man
prõtas -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <prõtas> mind -- the mind
negãl -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person present of <galė́ti, gãli, galė́jo> can -- can
pérmaniti -- verb; infinitive of <pérmanyti, pérmano, pérmanė> understand -- understand
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
ischrakúoti -- verb; infinitive of <išrokúoti, išrokúoja, išrokãvo> decribe, tell -- decribe

Marià irà mergà czistà, pir̃m uzgimìmo, patimè uzgimimmè, ir̃ passiliẽkt czistà mergà, põ pagim̃dimo sàwa.
 Collapse All
Marià -- proper noun, feminine; nominative singular of <Marijà> Mary -- Mary
irà -- verb; 3rd person present of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- is
mergà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <mergà> virgin -- a virgin
czistà -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <čỹstas, čystà> pure -- pure
pir̃m -- preposition; <pir̃m> before -- before
uzgimìmo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <užgimìmas> birth -- (her) birth
patimè -- pronoun; locative singular masculine of <pàts, patì> itself -- itself
uzgimimmè -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <užgimìmas> birth -- during (her) birth
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
passiliẽkt -- verb; 3rd person present reflexive of <pasilìkti, pasiliẽka, pasilìko> remain -- (she) remains
czistà -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <čỹstas, čystà> pure -- pure
mergà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <mergà> virgin -- a... virgin
põ -- preposition; <põ> after, over, on -- after
pagim̃dimo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <pagim̃dymas> giving birth -- giving birth
sàwa -- pronoun; genitive of <sàvo> he, she -- her

Tõ tùr nussistebéti, netiktaĩ zmogùs bèt ir̃ pãtis schwentíeghi Angelaĩ.
 Collapse All
tõ -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <tàs, tà> this, that -- at this
tùr -- verb; 3rd person present of <turė́ti, tùri, turė́jo> have -- have
nussistebéti -- verb; infinitive reflexive of <nusistebė́ti, nusìstebi, nusistebė́jo> marvel -- to marvel
netiktaĩ -- negative particle; <ne> not + particle; <tiktaĩ> only -- not only
zmogùs -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- man
bèt -- conjunction; <bèt> but -- but
ir̃ -- particle; <ir̃> and -- even
pãtis -- pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <pàts, patì> themselves -- themselves
schwentíeghi -- definite adjective; nominative plural masculine of <šveñtas, šventà> holy -- holy
Angelaĩ -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <ángelas> angel -- the... angels

Nès tataĩ taipaièg bùwa Diẽwo nóras ir̃ wãle, jr̃ teĩp tataĩ per̃ prarãka Esaiõschu búsent bùwa pranẽschdinens, bilódams:
 Collapse All
nès -- conjunction; <nès> because -- because
tataĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
taipaièg -- adverb; <teipajèg> also -- also
bùwa -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- was
Diẽwo -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Diẽvas> God -- God's
nóras -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <nóras> wish -- wish
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
wãle -- noun, feminine; nominative singular genitive of <vãlė> will -- will
jr̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
teĩp -- adverb; <teĩp> this way -- ...
tataĩ -- pronoun; neuter of <tàs, tà> this, that -- that
per̃ -- preposition; <per̃> through -- through
prarãka -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <prarãkas> prophet -- the prophet
Esaiõschu -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Esajošius> Isaiah -- Isaiah
búsent -- verb; future gerund(ive) of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- ...
bùwa -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- (he) had
pranẽschdinens -- verb; nominative singular masculine of preterit participle active of <pranèšdinti, pranẽšdina, pranẽšdino> prophesy -- prophesied
bilódams -- verb; singular masculine of half participle of <bylóti, bylója, bylójo> say -- saying

Schìtai (kaĩp kadà tar̃tu, dabókes zmogaũ stebùklo dìdzio) Pannà bùs nieschczià álba sunkì ir̃ pagimdĩs Súnu.
 Collapse All
schìtai -- pronoun; neuter of <šìtas, šità> this -- behold
kaĩp -- particle; <kaĩp> as, like -- as if
kadà -- adverb; <kadà> when -- ...
tar̃tu -- verb; 3rd person subjunctive of <tar̃ti, tãria, tãrė> say -- He would say
dabókes -- verb; 2nd person imperative singular reflexive of <dabótis, dabójasi, dabójosi> await -- await
zmogaũ -- noun, masculine; vocative singular of <žmogùs> human being, person -- oh man
stebùklo -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <stebùklas> miracle -- this... miracle
dìdzio -- adjective; genitive singular masculine of <dìdis, didì> great -- great
Pannà -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <panà> girl -- the girl
bùs -- verb; 3rd person future of <bū́ti, yrà, bùvo> be -- will be
nieschczià -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <nėščià> pregnant -- pregnant
álba -- conjunction; <álba> or -- or
sunkì -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <sunkùs, sunkì> heavy -- heavy
ir̃ -- conjunction; <ir̃> and -- and
pagimdĩs -- verb; 3rd person future of <pagimdýti, pagim̃do, pagim̃dė> bear -- will bear
Súnu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <sūnùs> son -- a son

Lesson Text
Taĩp tataĩ nũ añt añtro sáw ìsch schõs històrios atmiñk, Krìstu zmogumì gìmusi ìsch gimminẽs karãliu, bútent Dówido, nèsa ir̃ tataĩ Diẽwas teipõ bùwa lìkens ir̃ prannẽschens pacziám Karãlui Dówidui bilódams. Èsch tàwa Sékla pãskui tawè prikélsiu, kurì ìsh tàwa kúno turẽs ateĩti, ir̃ tõs karalĩste èsch patwìrtinsiu, beĩ karalĩstes iõ nè bùs gãlo. Bèt schìcze dĩwu dĩwai irà Marià, kurì dabar̃ sù wiru nè bùwa suwenczawóta, kuriõs wirìschkis nepakrùtina, kurì wíro nezinnóia, kaĩp tà ìsch dárbo Schwentõs Dwãses nieschczià álba sunkì rañdasi ir̃ bernẽli pagim̃da. Tõ sakaũ newíena zmogaũs prõtas negãl, pérmaniti ir̃ ischrakúoti. Marià irà mergà czistà, pir̃m uzgimìmo, patimè uzgimimmè, ir̃ passiliẽkt czistà mergà, põ pagim̃dimo sàwa. Tõ tùr nussistebéti, netiktaĩ zmogùs bèt ir̃ pãtis schwentíeghi Angelaĩ. Nès tataĩ taipaièg bùwa Diẽwo nóras ir̃ wãle, jr̃ teĩp tataĩ per̃ prarãka Esaiõschu búsent bùwa pranẽschdinens, bilódams: Schìtai (kaĩp kadà tar̃tu, dabókes zmogaũ stebùklo dìdzio) Pannà bùs nieschczià álba sunkì ir̃ pagimdĩs Súnu.
Translation
Therefore now in the second (chapter) remember from this story for yourself this, that Christ was born as a man, from his lineage as a king, namely of David, because God had remained (where David was) and prophesized also this to King David himself, saying: I will raise your seed after you, which (seed) shall come from your body and I will confirm the kingdom of this (seed) and there will be no end to this kingdom of his (seed).
But here the miracle of miracles is Mary, who had not married a man yet, whom the man had not touched, who had not known a man, how from the action of the Holy Ghost she becomes pregnant or heavy and bears a child. I say that the mind of not one man can understand or describe this. Mary is a pure virgin before her birth, during her birth and she remains a pure virgin after her giving birth. At this not only man, but even the holy angels themselves have to marvel. Because that also was God's wish and will and through the prophet Isaiah He had prophesied that, saying: Behold (as if He would say, await, oh man, this great miracle) the girl will be pregnant (or heavy) and will bear a son.
Grammar
31 The Stress and Intonation of Old Lithuanian
There were two types of accentuation for disyllabic nouns before Saussure's law took effect. Nouns of the first type (barytones) maintained a fixed stress in the root when inflected. The other type (oxytones) had a mobile stress. All long syllables (stressed and unstressed) were pronounced with the acute or the circumflex intonation. A dominant rise in pitch or stress was characteristic of the acute, and a fall in pitch or stress was characteristic of the circumflex. In Modern Lithuanian the acute syllables are pronounced rather with a fall in pitch or stress, and the circumflex syllables with a rise in pitch or stress. As Kazìmieras Būgà, one of the most prominent Lithuanian scholars of historical linguistics, says, this change occurred after the 12th century. Latvian maintained the ancient intonation pattern. However, none of these things are as yet sufficiently explained. The most recent works suggest an original different spectrum of sounds rather than the rise or fall in the syllable.

According to Saussure's law the stress on an original circumflex or short syllable shifted to a following acute stressed syllable, e.g., rañka, pùpa (the endings had the acute) became ranká, pupá and later changed to rankà 'hand', pupà 'bean' (i.e., they were shortened according to Leskien's law). The shift in stress also occurred in the middle of a word, cf. žolė́tas 'grassy' and acc. sg. fem. žõlę 'grass'. Linguists disagree as to when the shift in stress took place. There were also some attempts to extend the effect of this law to the Slavic languages. The Polish linguist J. Kurylowicz defines the law as the shifting of the stress from a circumflex or short syllable to the ending due to the shortening of the ending. Thus he combines Saussure's and Leskien's law into one.

The shifting of the stress changed the Lithuanian accentuation system. The current four accent classes developed from the earlier two accent types.

32 The Phonetics of Old Lithuanian
32.1 Vowels
The lexicon, phonetics and grammatical structure of the Lithuanian language are comparatively archaic. There is still much similarity between the Indo-European protolanguage and Lithuanian.

In this lesson the focus of attention will be the phonetic and grammatical peculiarities of the Lithuanian language at the time when the first written documents appeared (16-17th centuries).

In the East Baltic languages (Lithuanian and Latvian) the etymological Baltic diphthong ei became the diphthong ie in certain instances, and the etymological long o was diphthongized and became uo, e.g., diẽvas 'god', puódas 'pot'. The ancient long a and e were narrowed and became o and ė. The process affected e earlier and a later. In the writings of Mazvydas, Bretkunas, etc., we can still find long a instead of o, e.g., bralis (cf. brólis) 'brother'. Latvian has retained the long a. The tautosyllabic sequences an, en, in, un in position before nonplosive consonants and in the word-final position changed into the nasal vowels ą, ę, į, ų, e.g., kę̃sti 'suffer', acc.sg.masc. dañtį 'tooth', gen.pl.fem. rañkų 'hand'. The vocalic nasalization survived up to the time when the first Lithuanian written texts appeared (16-17 c.). The denasalization occurred in the 17th-18th c., however, it had started before the first written texts had appeared. Nasal resonance is recorded in the earliest grammars (e.g., in Daniel Klein's grammar).

This process was similar to the denasalization encountered in the Slavonic languages, but there is only a partial parallel development. The Latvian language was affected by this process more than Lithuanian.

The old short a, e were lengthened under stress, e.g., kãras 'war', rẽtas 'rare', but the vowels a, e both remained short in the final syllable or in a monosyllabic word, e.g., loc. sg. butè 'in the apartment', kàs 'who, what', nè 'no, not'. In the beginning lengthened a, e were only positional variants of the short vowels a, e. Later, short a, e developed as a result of a change of the stress because newly stressed a, e were not lengthened, e.g., didèsnis 'bigger', tàvo 'your', mèsiu 'I will throw'.

In Lithuanian there has been no phonetic reduction of short vowels in word endings, e.g., naktìs 'night', gražù 'it is nice', voc.sg. par̃še 'pig'. The short endings were only dropped in dialects or for morphological reasons. The long vowels in circumflex endings have remaind long, e.g., žolė̃ 'grass', vanduõ 'water'. In acute stressed endings all of the ancient stressed endings were shortened and uo, ie were replaced with u,i, cf. 1st pres. ruošiù 'I prepare' and 1st pres. refl. ruošiuó-si 'I prepare for, I am going'; nom. pl. masc. baltì 'white' and nom. pl. def. baltíe-ji. In contemporary Lithuanian the only acute stressed endings arose from the shortening of morphological forms, e.g., dat.sg.masc. vaikáms 'children' from vaikãmus; dat.sg.masc. baltám 'white' from baltãmui. In 1881 the German linguist August Leskien noticed this and proposed the rule which we now call Leskien's law. Later, it was established that acute stressed long vowels and uo, ie were shortened only in the endings of words that have no fewer than two syllables. The acute in monosyllabic words was changed to the circumflex, e.g., griáuti 'to destroy', griaũs '(he) will destroy', jū́sų 'your', jū̃s 'you'.

Non-front vowels tend to be fronted in position after palatalized consonants and j, e.g., brólei 'brothers' instead of bróliai, naũjes 'new' instead of naũjas.

The old texts contain quite a few examples of the contraction a+e=o, e.g., nopykanta (cf. neapýkanta) 'hatred', noteiti (cf. neateĩti) 'not to come'.

32.2 Consonants
In Lithuanian the hushing spirants š, ž (from Indo-European soft k, g) were kept intact, e.g., Lithuanian širdis 'heart' žinóti 'to know' and Latin cor, noscit (from the older form gnoscit). Other Baltic languages changed them to the hissing s, z, cf. Lithuanian žiemà 'winter', dẽšimt, 'ten' vs. Latvian ziema, desmit. The voiceless spirant s and the voiced spirant z are used in Lithuanian. The latter is quite rare in Lithuanian. It arose in the sequence zd (the voiceless s was pronounced as z before d) and can be found in loanwords and onomatopoetic words, e.g., drum̃zlės 'dregs' from older drumzdlės, zigzãgas 'zigzag', zvim̃bti 'to hum, to buzz'.

Iotation and palatalization of consonants was very important in the formation of the Lithuanian consonantal system. Palatalization must have been a very long process. The earliest palatalized consonants were k and g. j disappeared after l and some other consonants also quite early. The j after the labial consonants b, p, m, v survived the longest. In some dialects they are not yet palatalized. In Standard Lithuanian we have palatalized b, p only in the position before endings, in other positions they are still pronounced pj, bj. The soft t, d changed to the affricates č, dž.

The assimilative palatalization of consonants before front vowels occurred later, and was not so intensive as iotation. This process must have started in the eastern part of Lithuania so it might be related to East Slavic influence. The velar consonants k, g in a position before front vowels were softened quite early, e.g., kẽlias 'road', gẽras 'good'. This softening is reflected in the first written texts. The other consonants were softened at a later time. The consonants before i y, į, ie were softened more intensively than before e, ė, ę, ei. The Latvian language does not have the assimilative palatalization of consonants. Many consonants before e type vowels were palatalized after the appearance of written texts. In the eastern dialects more consonants were palatalized and the softening was stronger than in the western dialects. The labials p, b, m, v are barely palatalized in Lithuanian. The consonants f, ch, h did not exist in early Lithuanian. In loanwords, Lithuanians used to replace these consonants with their own sounds p, b, e.g., Prancìškus 'Francis', kỹtras 'clever', cf. Russian xitryj. Later, Lithuanians learned to pronounce them. In the earliest written texts of the eastern and central part of Lithuania the consonant v was affixed to the beginning of the word which started with a back vowel, and the consonant j to the beginning to the word which started with a front vowel, e.g., Wóras instead of óras 'weather', jieškóti instead of ieškoti 'to look for'.

Lithuanian has the affricates č, dž in place of the older tj, dj. It is quite difficult to determine exactly when the earlier tj, dj become affricates. However, the affricates existed before the appearance of the first Lithuanian books and other documents. Latvian has š, ž instead of ancient tj and dj, cf. Lithuanian vókiečiai 'Germans', bríedžiai 'elks' and Latvian vacieši, brieži.

In addition the affricates č, dž resulted from juncture of t+š and d+ž respectively, e.g., giñčas 'argument' from gint + šas, kárdžuvė 'swordfish' from kárdas 'sword' + žuvìs 'fish'. Affricates also occur in loanwords and onomatopoetic words, e.g. čiaumóti 'to champ, to chew', čempiònas 'champion'. The affricates c, dz arose from the juncture of t + s and d + z, e.g., atsiràsti 'to be found, to appear'. We can also find them in loanwords, onomatopoetic words and in the southern dialects of Lithuanian, e.g., dzenbudìzmas 'Zen Buddhism', citrinà 'lemon', dzìmbinti 'to walk lazily', cỹpti 'to squeal', dialectical cià 'here', dziaũgsmas 'joy'.

33 Old Lithuanian Nominal System
33.1 Nouns
Processes which had started in the East Baltic (Lithuanian, Latvian, etc.) period continued to affect the Lithuanian nominal and verbal system.

There are two genders possible in the Lithuanian noun. The neuter had disappeared already in East Baltic. Prussian (a West Baltic language) retained the neuter.

Nouns also had the dual number. Only the dual nominative-accusative, dative and instrumental endings differ from those of the plural:

Nom-Acc.	 	vaikù 'children', šakì 'limbs', katì 'cats', akì 'eyes', sū́nu 'sons', dukterì 'daughters'
Dat.	 	vaikám, šakóm, katė́m, akìm, sūnùm, dukterìm
Inst.	 	vaikam̃, šakõm, katė̃m, akim̃, sūnum̃, dukterim̃
Dual forms of the dative and instrumental are different only in stress. Examples:

Tiktaĩ dù výru pajė̃gs tą̃ leñtą užnèšti į̃ vir̃šų 'Only two men will be able to carry this plank up'.
Didžiúojuosi dviẽm sàvo seserim̃ 'I am proud of my two sisters'.
Lithuanian inherited seven cases. The Indo-European locative was replaced by the following four postpositive cases: innesive, illative, adessive and allative. Postpositive cases were used frequently in the first Lithuanian written texts. The innesive has adopted the function of the locative, e.g.:

Dangujè žibė́jo tū́kstančiai žvaigždžių̃
'Thousands of stars were twinkling in the sky'.
The inessive was formed by affixing the postposition en to the old locative.

Other postpositive cases were used in addition to corresponding prepositional phrases. The illative denotes movement into something, e.g.:

Pakeliuĩ užsùksiu ir̃ savivaldýbėn 'On the way I will also drop in at the municipality office'.
Vakarè eĩsim svečiúosna 'Tonight we will pay a visit'.
This case was replaced by the preposition į̃ plus the accusative in Modern Lithuanian, e.g.:

Pakeliuĩ užsùksiu ir̃ į̃ savivaldýbę 'On the way I will also drop in at the municipality office'.
Vakarè eĩsim į̃ svečiùs 'Tonight we will pay a visit'.
The illative was formed by affixing the postposition n(a) to the accusative.

The adessive denotes proximity to something, e.g.:

Tiẽ dabar̃ sė́di kójosemp Viẽšpaties 'They are sitting now at the feet of the Lord'.

The allative indicates direction towards something, e.g.:

Jìs nedrį̃so pakélt dangaũsp akių̃ savų̃
'He did not dare to raise his eyes to the sky'.
Both the adessive and the allative were formed by affixing the postposition pie. The adessive was formed when the postposition pie was added to the old locative and the allative was formed when pie was added to the genitive. The adessive and the allative competed with the preposition prie 'by, near, to' plus the genitive and pàs 'by, to' plus the accusative, e.g.:

Tiẽ dabar̃ sė́di priẽ Viẽšpaties kójų 'They are siting now at the feet of the Lord'.
Jìs nedrĩso pakélt į̃ dañgų sàvo akių̃ ''He did not dare to raise his eyes to the sky'.
Corresponding plural forms were created later.

Lithuanian inherited a very complex declensional system from the Indo-European protolanguage (see declension types and stems in Lesson 1). The historical stems of nouns are as follows:

 	 	Historical stems	 	Modern stems
 	 	Short o	 	a
 	 	Short io	 	ia
 	 	Short iio	 	ia
 	 	Long a	 	o
 	 	Long ia	 	io
 	 	Long e	 	ė
 	 	Short i	 	i
 	 	Short u	 	u
 	 	Short iu	 	iu
 	 	Consonant n	 	n
 	 	Consonant r	 	r
 	 	Consonant s	 	s
All of these declension types, except for the long e stem were inherited from the Indo-European. The historical iio stem with contraction of the ending is represented by contemporary Lithuanian ys, e.g., žaltỹs 'grass-snake'. The contemporary ending is represents a variant of the etymological iio, e.g., brólis 'brother'. However, the relative frequency of these various stems has changed in contemporary Lithuanian. The (ii)o, (i)a and e stems predominate in Modern Lithuanian whereas the others are gradually disappearing. The consonant (athematic) stems n, r and s began disappearing first. Most of these stems had i stem endings before the first written texts had appeared. The process started when the form of the consonant stem accusative endings merged with the i stem, cf. the consonant stem acc.sg.masc. šùnį 'dog', dùkterį 'daughter' and the i stem acc. sg. vãgį 'thief'',šãlį 'country'. In addition the (ii)o stem paradigm began influencing the i stem masculine noun paradigm, cf.

 	 	io stem	 	i stem
Gen sg	 	vìnio 'nail'	 	viniẽs
Dat sg	 	vìniui	 	vìniui
Acc sg	 	vìnį	 	vìnį
Inst sg	 	viniù	 	vinimì
Nom pl	 	viniaĩ	 	vìnys
Dat pl	 	viniáms	 	vinìms
Acc pl	 	viniùs	 	vinìs
Inst pl	 	viniaĩs	 	vinimìs
Loc pl	 	viniuosè	 	vinysè
The dative singular ending -ui predominates in Modern Lithuanian for the masculine gender, e.g., nãmui 'house', vãgiui 'thief', sū́nui 'son'. The feminine paradigm ending -iai became dominant in the`dat.sg., cf.: vãliai 'will' and šãliai 'country'. The shortening of the acute endings provided a stimulus for the o stem endings to influence the u stem paradigm (cf. acc.pl. stalùs 'tables' and sū́nus 'sons'). There are a few innovative forms in dialects and old documents, e.g.:

Nom pl	 	sūnaĩ 'sons' (instead of sū́nūs)
Dat pl	 	sūnáms (instead of sūnùms)
Inst pl	 	sūnaĩs (instead of sūnumìs)
The iu stem forms were rapidly replaced by the corresponding io stem forms. The plural cases now have only the new forms. The old endings were retained only in old texts.

The i, (i)u and consonant stems inherited instrumental singular and dative and instrumental plural forms with the Baltic-Slavic-Germanic consonant m, e.g., inst.sg. dalimì 'part', sūnumì 'son', šunimì 'dog', dat.pl. dalìms, sūnùms, šunìms, inst.pl. dalimìs, sūnumìs, šunimìs.

In the old writings we can find many long forms of the dative plural, cf.

daiktãmus 'things' and daiktáms
sūnùmus 'sons' and sūnùms
šalìmus 'countries' and šalìms
seserìmus 'sisters' and seserìms
33.2 Adjectives
In Modern Lithuanian disyllabic adjectives are stressed according to accentuation classes 3 or 4 (they are oxytones). However, accents in old texts indicate that there were many barytones in Lithuanian (accentuation classes 1 and 2), e.g., brángus 'dear', támsus 'dark', skáistus 'bright', bjaũrus 'hideous', kañtrus 'patient', teĩsus 'right', etc. Later the root stress started to disappear. Comparative degree adjectives with the suffix -esnis were also often stressed on the root (barytones), e.g., bjaũresnis 'more hideous'. Later they were accented according to accentuation class 2. Now it is changing to accentuation class 4.

There are three genders for adjectives: feminine, masculine and neuter. Neuter gender nominative-accusative forms are used to form nominal predicates, e.g.:

Laukè šil̃ta
'It is warm outside'.
They can also agree with neuter pronouns, e.g.:

vìsa kìta mán bùvo áišku
'The rest was clear for me'.
Like nouns, adjectives had singular, plural, and dual forms; e.g., dual:

Nom-Acc	 	dù gerù draugù 'two good friends'
Dat	 	dvíem geríem draugám
Inst	 	dviem̃ geriem̃ draugam̃
The adjectival declensional system is simpler than that of the nouns (see Lesson 3):

 	 	Historical stems	 	 	 	Modern stems	 	 
 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
 	 	Short o	 	Long a	 	a	 	o
 	 	Short io	 	Long ia	 	ia	 	io
 	 	Short iio	 	Long e	 	ia	 	ė
 	 	Short u	 	Long ia	 	u	 	io
We can also find remnants of the i stem (masc.) in the old texts and dialects, e.g., loc.sg. didimè pulkè 'in the big crowd'. The i stem gradually merged with the io stem (masc.). Comparative degree adjectives (masc.) now are declined according to the iio stem paradigm, although, at one time they belonged to the i stem paradigm, e.g., loc.sg. gerèsnime 'better' (cf. iio stem geresniamè). The superlative degree with the suffix -iausias now has the io stem paradigm. We can also find remnants of the i stem paradigm in old texts, e.g., loc.sg. mažiáusime 'smallest' (cf. io stem mažiáusiame).

Feminine adjectives are declined like nouns, but the masculine adjectives (also numerals and participles) inherited the following endings from pronouns:

Dat sg	 	tám(ui) senám(ui) páltui 'that old coat'
Loc sg	 	tamè senamè pálte
Nom pl	 	tiẽ senì páltai
Dat pl	 	tíem(us) seníem(us) páltam(u)s
There may have been a syntactic reason for the adjectives to adopt the pronominal endings. The pronouns always occupy the first position in a phrase. For this reason the other parts of speech which follow the pronoun agree with it. The ancient nominal endings and pronominal endings were used parallel for a long time. The adjectives that can be used as nouns have retained nominal endings in Lithuanian up to present, e.g., didžiaãkiui vaĩkui 'large-eyed child'.

At the end of preliterate period the io stem paradigm (masc.) began appearing in the u stem adjective paradigms on the influence of the corresponding ia stem feminine adjectives, cf. nom.sg. (he) žãlias 'green', (she) žalià, inst. sg. (he) žaliù, (she) žalià and nom. sg. (he) gražùs 'beautiful', (she) gražì, inst. sg. (he) gržiù, (she) gražià. We find now gražiù in place of ancient form gražumì (cf. sūnumì 'son'). In the first writings the following cases had io stem endings (the ancient endings were also used):

Inst sg	 	rūgščiù 'sour' (cf. u stem rūgštumì)
Loc sg	 	rūgščiamè (cf. u stem rūgštumè)
Gen pl	 	rūgščių̃ (cf. u stem rūgštų̃)
Acc pl	 	rū́gščius (cf. u stem rū́gštus)
Inst pl	 	rūgščiaĩs (cf. u stem rūgštumìs)
The io stem forms for the dat.sg. and loc.pl. were established early so we can find no examples in old documents.

Definite adjectives had not yet merged into one word when the first written texts appeared. However, the merged forms inherited from earlier times were already being used. The adjective (or participle) and pronoun could change position in non-merged sequences, e.g., pa-jo-prasto (cf. pàprastojo) 'ordinary', nu-jie-vargę (cf. nuvar̃gusieji) 'tired'. There are also remnants of the use of pronouns with nouns, e.g., dangujęjis 'heavenly' (literally 'which is in heaven'). The final merger of the adjectives and pronouns into one word occurred quite late. In old texts we can find, e.g., the loc.sg.fem. gerojejoje 'good', loc.sg.masc. geramejame, dat.sg.masc. geramuijamui, etc. This process was hindered by the existence of the indefinite adjective and pronoun jìs 'he', jì 'she'. Because of these pronouns more recent forms were often replaced with the older forms. This process led to the creation of many parallel forms for the same case. There was a different number of syllables in the definite adjective paradigm (trisyllabic, tetrasyllabic and pentasyllabic). Pentasyllabic forms were shortened due to systemic constraints, e.g., instead of loc.sg.fem. baltojejoje 'white' baltõjoje appeared.

The definite adjectives must have maintained the indefinite adjective stress position because the pronoun was affixed as an enclitic word, e.g., brángusis 'dear', meĩlusis 'loving'. As the accentuation of indefinite adjectives changed so did that of definite adjectives.

34 Verbal System of Old Lithuanian
34.1 Verbs
There are four tenses in Lithuanian. The present, preterit and future tenses were inherited from the East Baltic period. The past frequentative was formed later, e.g., nèšdavo '(he) used to carry'. This tense does not exist in all the Lithuanian dialects. Samogitian (Lowland) dialects use phrases comprised of the auxilary verb liuobė́ti 'to be used to' (cf. Russian "ljubit") and infinitive, e.g., liúobu šókt(i) 'I used to dance'. The past frequentative tense forms have not yet been sufficiently explained. There have been some attempts to link the suffix -dav- to the frequentative verb suffix -d-, e.g., jo-d-inė́ti 'to ride the horse often'. In the old texts we can also find the past frequentative suffix -lav- or -dlav- (the latter contains both suffixes).

The dual forms for verbs were inherited from early times:

 	 	Present	 	Past	 	Frequentative	 	Future	 	Subjunctive	 	Imperative
1st dual	 	nẽšava 'carry'	 	nẽšėva	 	nèšdavova	 	nèšiva	 	nèštuva	 	nèškiva
2nd dual	 	nẽšata	 	nẽšėta	 	nèšdavota	 	nèšita	 	nèštuta	 	nèškita
The present tense had thematic and athematic paradigms. There are three thematic paradigms depending on the stem-final vowels:

 	 	Historical stems	 	Modern stems
 	 	Short (i)o	 	(i)a
 	 	Short i	 	i
 	 	Long a	 	o
The present tense o stems are complex, since they include infixed derivatives (e.g., señka 'it becomes lower') and derivatives with the suffixes -st-, -n-, -d-, -j-, e.g., sveĩksta '(he) is improving', ráuna '(he) pulls up', vérda '(he) cooks', gìria '(he) praises'. We can also find forms derived from nouns, e.g., lapója '(it) puts forth leaves'. Many suffixed denominatives and deverbatives have o stem forms, e.g., grybáuja '(he) gathers mushrooms', šū́kauja ' (he) cries out'.

Except for the shift of the stress to the ending due to Saussure's law, all present tense disyllabic thematic forms have a root-stressed accentuation.

In old texts io stem forms began appearing instead of a stem forms on the influence of e stem past forms (cf. 3 pres. šìldo '(he) warms', 3 pret. šìldė 'warmed' and 3 pres. láukia ' (he) waits' and láukė 'waited'), e.g., 3 pres. šìldžia '(he) warms', gýdžia '(he) heals', mìgdžia '(he) lulls to sleep', etc.

The athematic paradigm was as follows:

 	 	'be'	 	'remain'	 	'give'	 	'save'
1st sg	 	esmì	 	liekmì	 	dúomi	 	gélbmi
2nd sg	 	esì	 	lieksì	 	dúosi	 	gélbsi
3rd sg	 	ẽst(i)	 	liẽkt(i)	 	dúost(i)	 	gélbt(i)
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	esmè	 	liekmè	 	dúome	 	gélbme
2nd pl	 	estè	 	liektè	 	dúoste	 	gélbte
3rd pl	 	ẽsti	 	liẽkt(i)	 	dúost(i)	 	gélbt(i)
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1st dual	 	esvà	 	liekvà	 	dúova	 	gélbva
2nd dual	 	està	 	liektà	 	dúosta	 	gélbta
Some verbs do not have athematic equivalents in other Indo-European languages, e.g., lìkti 'remain', giedóti 'to sing hymns', miegóti 'to sleep', bė́gti 'to run', etc. There are verbs whose athematic forms appeared quite late, even in the 18th century. The athematic conjugation, which was disappearing in the Lithuanian language, had at one time been quite widespread. Quite a few athematic and thematic doublets were already used in the earliest written texts. Most frequently the athematic stems were replaced with the pure o stem. Some verbs acquired an infixed sto, no, etc. forms, e.g., mė́gsta '(he) likes', eĩna '(he) goes'.

The past tense (preterite) had two stems: long a stem and long e stem:

 	 	Historical stems	 	Modern stems
 	 	Long a	 	o
 	 	Long e	 	ė
Their origin is not clear. This tense takes the place of the old aorist and the perfect tense. The root vocalism of past tense forms often differs from that of present tense forms. The past tense forms often have zero or lengthened grade ablaut, e.g., 3 pres. per̃ka '(he) buys', 3 pret. pir̃ko 'bought'; 3 pres. gìna '(he) defends', 3 pret. gýnė 'defended'. There was a past tense stem bi- instead of bùvo 'was' in very early times. It has survived in Latvian. This change in the past tense occurred in the preliterate period.

The Lithuanian sigmatic future was inherited from the Baltic protolanguage. There are two variants of the sigmatic formant -si- (i stem) and -s- (athematic). We do not have enough data to indicate which of these stems is older. The future tense paradigm is a mixture of two old inherited conjugation types (see Lesson 2). Because of the shortening of acute stressed endings (Leskien's law) and the change of the acute to the circumflex in monosyllabic words, we have two models of the 3rd person future: the first has a shortened vowel and the second has a long vowel. From the old form rýs '(he) will swallow' regular development would produce rỹs '(he) will swallow' in the monosyllabic word and in the disyllabic prefixed form prarìs 'swallow up'. This double development was regularized by the adoption of monosyllabic rìs on the model of disyllabic prarìs. In disyllabic verbs the long vowel model was supported by other personal forms (cf. 1 fut. galvósiu 'I will think', skaitýsiu 'I will read'), e.g., galvõs '(he) will think', skaitỹs '(he) will read'. Regular development should have produced 3 fut. galvòs '(he) will think', skaitìs '(he) will read', but such forms are not used in standard Lithuanian, although they may be encountered in dialects. Long vowels are not graphically differentiated in old texts so it is difficult to ascertain the time of these processes. In standard Lithuanian the stress of the 1st person singular and 2nd person singular ending of disyllabic verbs having circumflex or short stressed roots is shifted to the root from the former acute stressed ending, cf.

1st sg	 	šaũksiu 'I will cry' and šauksiù; ràsiu 'I will find' and rasiù
2nd sg	 	šaũksi 'you will cry' and šauksì; ràsi 'you will find' and rasì
Eastern Lithuanian dialects have still maintained the stressed endings.

Imperative mood forms have the infinitive stem expanded with the formant -ki- plus the personal endings (see Lesson 3). The origin of this formant might have been some sort of particle (cf. Lithuanian gi, Slavic "ka"). Besides these forms, Lithuanian has forms deriving from the Indo-European optative. The East Lithuanian Vilnius dialect has retained forms the basis of which is not the infinitive, but rather the present tense stem, e.g.,

2nd sg	 	nèš(i) 'carry' (3 pres. nẽša '(he) carries'), duõd(i) 'give' (3 pres. dúoda '(he) gives').
2nd sg	 	mýly 'love' (3 pres. mýli '(he) loves'), žiūrỹ 'look' (3 pres. žiū̃ri '(he) looks').
2nd sg	 	dãrai 'make' (3 pres. dãro ' (he) makes'), gáudai 'catch' (3 pres. gáudo '(he) catches').
This type of the imperative mood is related to the desiderative mood (permisive). It has only the third person forms derived from the Indo-European optative. They are reinforced with the preposed particle te-, e.g.:

tenešiẽ 'let (someone) carry';
težiūrỹ 'let (someone) look';
tegáudai 'let (someone) catch'.
Eventually this mood was also expressed by the present tense forms, e.g., tèneša 'let (someone) carry', težiū̃ri 'let (someone) look', tegù(l) nẽša 'let (someone) carry', etc. In dialects we can find testà instead of tegùl. These particles are derived from the permissive forms of the verbs gulė́ti 'to lie, to be in a recumbent position' and stovė́ti 'to stand'.

The subjunctive mood was formed from the supine which was expanded with the formant -bi- and personal endings. Its paradigm was as follows:

1st sg	 	pasakytum̃biau	 	'I would tell'
 	 	pasakyčià	 	 
2nd sg	 	pasakytum̃bei	 	 
3rd sg	 	pasakytų̃	 	 
 	 	 	 	 
1st pl	 	pasakytum̃bime	 	 
2nd pl	 	pasakytum̃bite	 	 
3rd pl	 	pasakytų̃	 	 
 	 	 	 	 
1st dual	 	pasakytum̃biva	 	 
2nd dual	 	pasakytum̃bita	 	 
The third person form was a pure supine. The -bi- is derived from some form of the auxiliary verb bū́ti 'to be'. The 1st person form pasakyčià predominates in old texts. Later this paradigm was simplified. At present forms of the subjunctive mood maintain the infinitive stress position.

Reflexive verbs were formed before the appearance of the first written texts. However, the particle si might still have some degree of freedom, e.g., tàs vélnias netùri kur̃ si-dė̃tis(i) 'that devil has nowhere to go'. The position of the reflexive particle in prefixed verbs was much freer in old texts and dialects than in the contemporary standard language, e.g., with the reflexive particle occurring both between the second prefix and the root as well as in word final position ne-pa-si-piktysiuo-si 'I will not become indignant', nu-žemyki-si 'abase yourself'. Besides the reflexive particle si there was also another variant se. Both these particles were shortened to s in word-final position, e.g., kreĩpkimės 'let us appeal to (somebody)'.

34.2 Participles
Lithuanian participles are inherited from the earliest times, except for the active past frequentative participle. The present active participle has the present tense stem of the verb expanded by the suffix -nt-. o and a stem participles have a participial stem with -a-nt- and i stem participles have a stem with -i-nt-, e.g., acc.sg.masc. šókantį 'dancing', jumping', stóvintį 'standing'.

The past active participial forms are based on the past tense stem of the verbs. They are expanded with the suffix -us-, e.g., acc.sg.masc. šókusį 'having danced, having jumped'. Their nom.sg.masc. forms have the ending -ęs instead of -us-, e.g., augęs 'having grown'. This ending is the result of the influence of the present participle, cf. áugąs 'growing'.

Future active participles are formed from the future tense stem with the same suffix -nt- as in present participles, e.g., acc.sg.masc. stovė́siantį 'will be standing'. They are expanded not with -s(i)- as in verbal forms but rather with -sio-.

Frequentative past active participles were formed late, when the past frequentative tense came into use. They have the frequentative tense stem of the verb and the same suffix -us- as the past active participles, e.g., acc.sg.masc. šoḱdavusį 'she used to dance'. Some dialects do not use these participles.

The masculine active participles were inflected according to the consonant declension paradigm. Corresponding feminine forms had long ia stems (with the exception of nom.sg. ending i, e.g., stóvinti 'standing'). Under the influence of the feminine ia stem the masculine consonant declension began disappearing. The consonant declension forms were replaced with short io stem forms. The pronominal inflection paradigm also influenced the masculine participle inflectional system.

Passive participles had developed from certain adjectives a long time ago. The present passive participle has the present tense stem of the verb which is expanded with the suffix -mo-, e.g., nom.sg.masc. láukiamas 'being awaited', mýlimas 'being loved'. The past passive participles have the infinitive stem expanded with the suffix -to-, e.g., nom.sg.masc. láuktas 'awaited', mylė́tas 'loved'. Future passive participles are formed from the future tense stem expanded with the same suffix -mo- that is in present passive participles, e.g., nom.sg.masc. láuksimas 'will be awaited'.

In early times the accentuation of participles was dependent on the accentuation of verbs. Participles formed from barytone verbs had the fixed verbal stem stress, and participles that were formed from oxytone verbs had a mobile stress paradigm. Later this difference started disappearing. It was partly retained only by present participles.

Gerunds arose from the dative singular forms of old active participles with the consonantal ending i (or ie) used in the the dative absolute construction, e.g., pàtekanti (cf. pàtekant) 'rising'. Pronominal endings are not encountered in dative absolute constructions because the participle functioned here as the predicate. Being isolated from the active participle paradigm, they lost their dative meaning and changed to the gerunds. The long forms were already quite rare in the first written texts. Absolute participle constructions (with the pronominal dative endings) survived even when the old active participial datives had changed to gerunds. We can find parallel constructions in old texts, e.g.:

Sáulei nusiléidusiai (nusiléidus) ė̃jome namõ 'We were going home when the sun had set'.
Giesmė̃ pàkasañti (pàkasant) žmogaũs kū́ną 'The hymn (which is sung) when burying a man's body'.
The half-participles have the infinitive stem expanded with the suffix -dama-. Its origin is not clear. Researchers tend to think that the suffix is a compound form consisting of -da- and -ma- (cf. 3 pres. vér-da 'boils' and pres.ptc.pass. laukia-mas 'being awaited'). Half-participles function as predicate modifiers. They have only nominative forms. In the period of East Baltic development, half-participles had already begun replacing active participles when they were used adverbially.

The current participle system is the result of a long development. Participles were derived from the nominal forms and linked to verbal forms at a later time. Verbal nouns having the suffixes -nt- and -us- became nonfinite verbal forms first, later verbal adjectives with -to- and still later with -mo-. The nominal nature of participles is the most evident in their attributive usage, e.g.:

Gyvulė̃lis žiūrė́jo į̃ manè pavar̃gusiomis maldáujančiomis akimìs
'The small animal was looking at me with tired and pleading eyes'.
Researchers consider the usage of participles in a semi-predicative manner to be primary and most important. Many of these participles have had a secondary predicate function since early times, e.g.:

Žinójo namõ vėlaĩ sugrįšiąs
'He knew that he would return home late'.
The predicate usage of participles was the basis for the development of compound verbal forms and for the so-called indirect discourse. In indirect discourse participles may be used instead of verbs. We have to do with indirect discourse when the writer or the speaker transmits the conversation or narrative of other person in his own words, e.g.;

Jõnas sãkosi vìsą vãkarą televìzorių žiūrė́jęs ir̃ niẽko negirdė́jęs
'John says (now) that he watched television the whole evening and heard nothing'.
35 Uninflected Parts of Speech of Old Lithuanian
The Lithuanian language inherited many adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions and particles from early times. A number of new ones were derived from inflected forms.

The adverbial system changed quickly. Some adverbs eventually disappeared, while new ones appeared. The adverbs kur̃ 'where', nū̃ 'now', jaũ 'already', teñ 'there', etc. were inherited from the Baltic or Proto-Indo-European period. Adverbs were also formed from adjectives using the formant ai, e.g., from šil̃tas 'warm' šiltaĩ 'warmly'. Their comparative degree had the suffix -iaus, e.g., geriaũs 'better', šilčiaus' warmer'. This suffix was shortened later to -iau, e.g., geriau 'better', šilčiau 'warmer'. Now the same suffix is used in the superlative degree of adjectives (cf. šilč-iaus-ias 'the warmest'). The superlative degree for adverbs was also formed with -iaus, e.g., geriáusiai 'best', šilčiausiai 'most warmly'.

Many adverbs are formed using the suffix -yn(iui), e.g., artỹn 'nearer', šiltỹn 'warmer'.

Many adverbs are derived from various inflected parts of speech. The process of adverbialization is quite long. The former endings are dropped or are changed to an adverbial formants. Most adverbs are derived from the instrumental case as its forms function often as modifiers, e.g., pamažù 'slowly', príešais 'in front of', staigà 'suddenly', netyčiomìs 'not on purpose'. From the neuter nominative-accusative we have gaĩla 'feeling pity', etc. and from the genitive visadõs 'always', iš tiesų̃ 'truly', etc. There are quite a few adverbs with -ui, e.g., paskuĩ 'later' ìlgainiui 'eventually', etc. Most of the accusative forms are compound words, e.g., kasmẽt 'every year', šį̃ryt 'this morning', etc. Some adverbs are derived from the old locative (e.g., namie 'at home', ankstì 'early') and the new postpositive locative (e.g., šaliñ 'away', vakaróp 'towards evening').

The nonfinite forms of verbs tend to be adverbialized more often than finite forms, especially gerunds, e.g., bemãtant 'immediately', ver̃kiant 'certainly'.

Many prepositions have correspondences in other Indo-European languages, e.g., apiẽ 'about, around', bè 'without' ìš 'from', nuõ 'from', per̃ 'through', 'over', priẽ 'by, near', etc. Some prepositions were shortened, e.g., antà (cf. añt) 'on', užù (cf. ùž) 'behind, outside'. In old written texts we can find the longer prefix variants that are linked to corresponding prepositions, e.g., užunèšti 'to carry up', apinèšti 'to carry round'. There are also postpositions in Lithuanian, e.g., dė̃lei 'because of', liñk 'towards':

Pasisténk jo dė̃lei 'Do your best for him'
Pasùkome ùpės liñk 'We turned towards the river'.
The prepositions ikì 'until', põ 'under, after', priẽ 'by, near' were used with the dative in old writings, e.g., ikì sū̃do diẽnai 'until the day of the judgement', põ tái mal̃dai 'after that prayer', nusidėjìmai priẽ(g) dū̃šiai pasiliẽka 'the sins remain in the soul'. These prepositions commonly govern the genitive today. We also find the preposition drin 'because of' instead of dė̃l 'because of' in these texts.

New prepositions may be derived from inflected words, e.g., príešais 'before, across from' (cf. priéšas 'enemy'), tar̃p 'between' (cf. tárpas 'interval'), tiẽs 'towards' (cf. tiesùs 'straight').

The role of prepositions has been constantly expanding in Lithuanian. This process continues in Modern Lithuanian.

The Lithuanian language has some conjunctions that are related to conjunctions in other Indo-European languages, e.g., ir̃ 'and', õ 'but, while', ar̃ 'if, whether'. The number of conjunctions is also constantly increasing. Some of them are connected to adverbs or prepositions, e.g., kadà 'when' (cf. kàd 'that'), ligì 'until', kaĩp 'how'.

Since early times the same words could function both as conjunctions and as particles. In Lithuanian these small words are combined with other particles, mostly with those beginning with g- or b-, e.g., ar̃gi 'if', argu 'if', ir̃gi 'also', arba 'or', etc. In old writings the inherited particle gi (and its variants ga, ge) was used very frequently, being affixed to both uninflected as well as inflected words, e.g.

Klausýkimeg(i) ką̃ kal̃ba 'Listen what (they) speak'.
Todė̃lig(i) sakaũ táu 'Therefore I say to you'.
Bè 'without' is inherently related to bà, bõ, bù. The variant bei 'and' was at some point lengthened with the particle -i. The particle bèt 'but' is derived from the small words mentioned above; its variant bàt is also used in old writings. Linguists also infer a connection between jóg 'that', jéi 'if, whether' and the Indo-European relative pronoun ios expanded with the particle gi. Nè 'no, not', nė̃ 'not a' and neĩ 'neither... nor' are inherited words. Nèt 'even' can also be connected with these particles.

Lesson 8: Latvian
Lilita Zalkalns, Peteris Vanags, and Jonathan Slocum
The most outstanding Latvian modern realist of the late 19th century was Rūdolfs Blaumanis (1863-1908). A prolific writer and dramatist, he is most noted for his masterful short stories and plays. He was influenced early on by the National Awakening revival, which had begun in the 1850's, and he was sympathetic to the revolutionary New Current movement, which started in the 1880's among radical Latvian intellectuals. Blaumanis expressed social pathos and his sympathy for the plight of the Latvian poeple in prose works, drama, poetry, and satire. His interests lay in concentrating on the present, in describing situations recognizable by ordinary Latvians, and dealing with immediate issues concerning society in general.

In his works, Blaumanis focuses on the conflicts between the heart and mind, and portrays the depths of human emotions, both positive and negative. Even today his many stories and plays retain their freshness and relevance. He never revelled in negativity just for the sake of novelty, nor did he moralize.

By his skillful use of aptly directed words and actions, intertwined with precise detail, Blaumanis conjures up a virtual time-space of Latvia at the turn of the last century, depicting the lives of the well-to-do and of those less fortunate. His stories are set in the bustling city as well as in the countryside, where, under a seemingly serene facade, emotions are ready to be set loose at any moment, eventually to explode either in tragedy or comedy.

Blaumanis has created a number of classic, unforgettable characters in Latvian literature, including many striking portraits of Latvian women. Today these characters are a part of Latvian literary discourse.

Reading and Textual Analysis
Rūdolfs Blaumanis' work "In the Shadow of Death" (1899) is based on a newspaper account of several fishermen lost at sea on an ice floe. The short story portrays the characters of fourteen fishermen and their reactions as they encounter a life-threatening situation on a dwindling ice floe. A small fishing boat passes by after five harrowing days, but it can seat only eleven. After casting lots, the three who must remain are the most honest and decent of the group: the natural leader Grīntāls, who kept the group from disintegrating into anarchy, the young and innocent Kārlēns ("Charlie"), who could have saved himself when the ice floe broke away but instead ran back to warn the others, and old Dalda, who gave up his place in the boat to his son. As the three disappear on the horizon, Blaumanis leaves us with the conviction that it is these men who have already won their victory over death.

Blaumanis played an important role in raising standards in the language and style of written Latvian during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. As a newspaper editor and leading cultural personality, his recommendations, criticisms, and publications on correct Latvian inspired many of the period's young Latvian writers and authors to explore and uncover the genuine directness and compactness of Latvian expression, and to challenge the direct imitation of the dominating German, and to some extent Russian, language styles.

Labu laiku garenais dūmu stabiņš palika vienlīdzīgi liels.
 Collapse All
labu -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <labs> good -- for a long
laiku -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <laiks> time -- time
garenais -- definite adjective; nominative singular masculine of <garens> longish -- the elongated
dūmu -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <dūms> smoke -- smoke
stabiņš -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <stabiņš> little pillar -- pillar
palika -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <palikt, palieku, paliku> remain, become -- remained
vienlīdzīgi -- adverb; <vienlīdzīgi> equally -- the same
liels -- adjective; nominative singular masculine of <liels> large -- size

Nekustēdamies zvejnieki viņā skatījās, nejaudādami gandrīz pat ne acu pamirkšķināt.
 Collapse All
nekustēdamies -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; nominative plural masculine present participle reflexive of <kustēties, kustos, kustējos> move -- not moving
zvejnieki -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <zvejnieks> fisherman -- the fishermen
viņā -- pronoun; locative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- at it
skatījās -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <skatīties, skatos, skatījos> look at, gaze,stare -- stared
nejaudādami -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; nominative plural masculine present participle active of <jaudāt, jaudāju, jaudāju> be able, can -- not being able to
gandrīz -- adverb; <gandrīz> almost, nearly, all but -- almost
pat -- adverb; <pat> even -- even
ne -- negative particle; <ne> not -- not
acu -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <acs> eye -- of the eyes
pamirkšķināt -- verb; infinitive of <pamirkšķināt, pamirkšķinu, pamirkšķināju> blink -- blink

Bet tad viņu skati metās arvien stīvāki, arvien šausmīgāki.
 Collapse All
bet -- conjunction; <bet> but, yet, however -- but
tad -- adverb; <tad> then, after that -- then
viņu -- pronoun; genitive plural masculine of <viņš> he -- their
skati -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <skats> look, sight, view -- gazes
metās -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <mesties, metos, metos> set in -- became
arvien -- adverb; <arvien> all the time, the whole time -- the whole time
stīvāki -- adjective; comparative nominative plural masculine of <stīvs> stiff -- stiffer
arvien -- adverb; <arvien> all the time, the whole time -- the whole time
šausmīgāki -- adjective; comparative nominative plural masculine of <šausmīgs> terrible, horrible, awful -- more horrible

Mākonītis sāka dilt!
 Collapse All
mākonītis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular <mākonītis> little cloud -- little cloud
sāka -- verb,; 3 sg.pret. of <sākt, sāku, sāku> begin -- began
dilt -- verb; infinitive of <dilt, dilstu, dilu> decrease, wane, dwindle -- fading

Tvaikonis netuvojās viņiem, tas viņus neredzēja, vai negribēja redzēt!
 Collapse All
tvaikonis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <tvaikonis> steamboat -- the steamboat
netuvojās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <tuvoties, tuvojos, tuvojos> to approach -- approached
viņiem -- pronoun; dative plural masculine of <viņš> he -- to them
tas -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- it
viņus -- pronoun; accusative plural masculine of <viņš> he -- them
neredzēja -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <redzēt, redzu, redzēju> to see -- did not see
vai -- conjunction; <vai> or -- or
negribēja -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <gribēt, gribu, gribēju> to want -- did not want
redzēt -- verb; infinitive of <redzēt, redzu, redzēju> to see -- to see

Tas viņiem aizbrauca garām!
 Collapse All
tas -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- it
viņiem -- pronoun; dative plural masculine of <viņš> he -- to them
aizbrauca -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <aizbraukt, aizbraucu, aizbraucu> to leave -- passed
garām -- adverb; <garām> past, by -- by

Kā nakts ēna nolaidās uz visu ģīmjiem.
 Collapse All
kā -- adverb; <kā> as, like -- like
nakts -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <nakts> night -- the night
ēna -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <ēna> shadow -- a shadow
nolaidās -- verb; verb <nolaisties, nolaižos, nolaidos> to descend -- fell
uz -- preposition; <uz> on, upon -- on
visu -- pronoun; genitive plural masculine of <visi> everybody, everyone -- everyone's
ģīmjiem -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <ģīmis> face -- faces

Plagas turētāji kārti palaida vaļā, tā nogāzās un Zaļga sarkano kreklu mīdīja ar kājām un kodīja sava kažoka piedurkni.
 Collapse All
plagas -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <plaga> flag -- of the flag
turētāji -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <turētājs> holder -- holders
kārti -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <kārts> pole -- pole
palaida -- verb; 3rd person plural preterit of <palaist, palaižu, palaidu> to let go, release -- let go
vaļā -- adverb of; <vaļā> open -- open
tā -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <tas, tā> that -- it
nogāzās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <nogāzties, nogāžos, nogāzos> to tumble down -- fell
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
Zaļga -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Zaļga> Zalga -- Zalga
sarkano -- definite adjective; accusative singular masculine of <sarkanais> the red -- the red
kreklu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <krekls> shirt -- shirt
mīdīja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <mīdīt, mīdu, mīdīju> to tread, trample -- trampled
ar -- preposition; <ar> with, together, and -- with
kājām -- noun, feminine; dative plural of <kāja> foot -- feet
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
kodīja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <kodīt,kodu, kodīju> bite repeatedly -- chewed
sava -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <savs> his -- his
kažoka -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <kažoks> fur coat -- of the fur coat
piedurkni -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <piedurkne> sleeve -- the sleeve

Nabaga Skrastiņš bija atšļūcis uz ragavām un muldēja tur nesaprotamus vārdus un smējās.
 Collapse All
nabaga -- adjective; genitive singular masculine of <nabags> poor, needy -- poor
Skrastiņš -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Skrastiņš> Skrastins -- Skrastins
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- was
atšļūcis -- verb; singular masculine past active participle of <atšļūkt, atšļūcu, atšļūcu> to slip down -- had fallen down
uz -- preposition; <uz> on, upon -- on
ragavām -- noun, feminine; dative plural of <ragavas> sled, sleigh -- sleigh
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
muldēja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <muldēt, muldu, muldēju> to babble, rave -- babbled
tur -- adverb; <tur> there -- there
nesaprotamus -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; accusative plural masculine present passive participle of <saprast, saprotu, sapratu> to understand -- comprehensible
vārdus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <vārds> word, name -- words
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
smējās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <smieties, smejos, smējos> to laugh -- laughed

Kārlēns Birkenbaumu cieti bija apkampis, un Grīntāls stāvēja un skatījās aizvien vēl uz to vietu, kur mākonītis bija nozudis.
 Collapse All
Kārlēns -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Kārlēns> Charlie -- Charlie
Birkenbaumu -- proper noun, masculine; accusative singular of <Birkenbaums> Birkenbaums -- Birkenbaums
cieti -- adverb; <cieti> tightly -- tightly
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- was
apkampis -- verb; singular masculine past active participle of <apkampt, apkampju, apkampu> to embrace -- had embraced
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
Grīntāls -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Grīntāls> Grintals -- Grintals
stāvēja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <stāvēt, stāvu, stāvēju> to stand -- stood
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
skatījās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <skatīties, skatos, skatījos> to look, stare -- stared
aizvien -- adverb; <aizvien> all the time, the whole time -- the whole time
vēl -- adverb; <vēl> still, yet -- still
uz -- preposition; <uz> on, upon -- on
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <tas, tā> that -- that
vietu -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <vieta> place -- place
kur -- adverb; <kur> where -- where
mākonītis -- noun, masculine; nominative singular <mākonītis> little cloud -- little cloud
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- was
nozudis -- verb; singular masculine past active participle of <nozust, nozūdu, nozudu> to disappear -- had disappeared

Lesson Text
Labu laiku garenais dūmu stabiņš palika vienlīdzīgi liels. Nekustēdamies zvejnieki viņā skatījās, nejaudādami gandrīz pat ne acu pamirkšķināt. Bet tad viņu skati metās arvien stīvāki, arvien šausmīgāki. Mākonītis sāka dilt! Tvaikonis netuvojās viņiem, tas viņus neredzēja, vai negribēja redzēt! Tas viņiem aizbrauca garām! Kā nakts ēna nolaidās uz visu ģīmjiem. Plagas turētāji kārti palaida vaļā, tā nogāzās un Zaļga sarkano kreklu mīdīja ar kājām un kodīja sava kažoka piedurkni. Nabaga Skrastiņš bija atšļūcis uz ragavām un muldēja tur nesaprotamus vārdus un smējās. Kārlēns Birkenbaumu cieti bija apkampis, un Grīntāls stāvēja un skatījās aizvien vēl uz to vietu, kur mākonītis bija nozudis.
Translation
For a long time the elongated pillar of smoke remained the same size. Motionless, the fishermen stared at it, not being able to even blink their eyes. But then their eyes stiffened in horror. The little cloud of steam was fading away!
The steamboat wasn't coming any closer - it didn't see them, or didn't want to see them! It passed them by! A dark shadow fell on all their faces. The holders of the flag let go of the flagpole, it fell, and Zalga trampled the red shirt with his feet and chewed on the sleeve of his fur coat. Poor Skrastins had fallen back on the sleigh and was babbling incomprehensibly and laughing. Charlie held Birkenbaums tightly, and Grintals stood and kept on staring at the spot where the little cloud of steam had disappeared.
Grammar
1 The Alphabet
The oldest surviving printed documents in Latvian date from the sixteenth century and appear in Gothic (fraktur) script. The ensuing orthographic tradition, called Early Written Latvian, was introduced by noted Baltic German clergyman and philologist Georg Mancelius (1593-1654).

Over the following centuries several parallel orthographical systems in the Latin and Gothic scripts were in use. In addition, the Cyrillic script was used in the province of Latgale from 1865 to 1904, as a result of the Czarist Russian ban on Latin script. At the beginning of the twentieth century the Orthographical Commission of the Riga Latvian Association (Rīgas Latviešu Biedrība) established principles for the "new orthography", which essentially meant the use of Latin script with diacritics. The orthography of current Modern Latvian is based on the Latvian SSR orthography reform of 1956.

The Latvian alphabet consists of 33 letters: 24 consonants and 9 vowels --

 	 	a	 	ā	 	b	 	c	 	č	 	d	 	e	 	ē	 	f	 	g	 	ģ
 	 	h	 	i	 	ī	 	j	 	k	 	ķ	 	l	 	ļ	 	m	 	n	 	ņ
 	 	o	 	p	 	r	 	s	 	š	 	t	 	u	 	ū	 	v	 	z	 	ž
Among the differences between the Latvian and English alphabets are 11 additional letters:

ā = a (as in 'calm')
č = ch (as in 'check')
ē = a (as in 'baby')
ģ = d (as in 'dew', 'due')
ī = ee (as in 'meet')
ķ = t (as in 'tune') or qu (as in 'queue')
ļ = l (as in 'lewd')
ņ = n (as in 'new')
š = sh (as in 'push')
ū = oo (as in 'boot')
ž = zh (as in 'pleasure')
1.1 Vowels
The Latvian vowels are pronounced as they are in Latin. Vowels are always short, except when topped by a macron, which indicates a lengthening of the vowel. Under similar circumstances, the long vowels are twice as long as the short ones. Thus ā is similar to the English long vowel in 'calm'; ī denotes a long vowel as in English 'meet'; ū denotes a long vowel as in English 'boot'.

The e represents two different phonemes, known as "closed e" (šaurais e) and "open e" (platais e):

"Closed e" as in te 'here', nest 'to carry', pele 'mouse'. A closed front vowel with lip spreading, corresponding approximately to the e of English 'net'.
"Open e" as in nesam 'we carry', vecs 'old'. An open front vowel with slight lip spreading, corresponding approximately to the a of English 'man'.
Like e, ē represents two different phonemes, "closed ē" and "open ē":

"Closed ē" as in vēlēt 'to wish, vote', mēle 'tongue'. Pronounced as "closed short e" above, but lengthened, corresponding approximately to the a in English 'baby'.
"Open ē" as in lēns 'slow', jērs 'lamb'. Pronounced as "open short e" above, but lengthened, corresponding approximately to the a in English 'man'.
In general, the grapheme o represents three different sounds. In words of foreign origin, the 'o' is either short or long and pronounced similar to the monophthong o as in Scottish 'loch'. Thus hormons 'hormone' is pronounced with short 'o'in the first syllabe, long 'o' in the second syllable. In words of Latvian origin, 'o' is pronounced as the diphthong /uo/ or /ua/ similar to wa in English 'wallet': ola 'egg', dot 'to give', ozols 'oak'. See below.

1.2 Diphthongs
Latvian has 10 diphthongs, of which 5 (eu, oi, ou, iu, ui) are quite rare, or found mainly in borrowings and foreign words:

ai = i as in English 'pine, fine'
au = ow as in English 'how, now'
ei = ey as in English 'prey'
eu = no English counterpart
ou = no English counterpart
oi = oy as in English 'boy'
iu = no English counterpart, equivalent to i + u
ui = ui as in German pfui
ie = no English counterpart, similar to diphthong /ia/
o = /uo/ or /ua/ = a as in English 'wallet'
1.3 Consonants
There are voiced and unvoiced consonants:

Voiced: b, d, g, ģ, z, ž, dz, j
Unvoiced: p, t, k, ķ, s, š, c
The articulation of Latvian consonants differs from that of English consonants. Latvian consonants are pronounced with the speech organs relatively relaxed; they are not aspirated as in English 'p', 't', 'k'. The Latvian r is rolled as in Spanish.

The letter c corresponds to ts in English 'cats'. The letter j corresponds to y in English 'yes'.

Several consonants can be soft, or palatalized, which is indicated by a comma underneath (or for the g, an inverted comma above) the letter: ļ, ķ, ņ, ģ. To soften the consonant the middle of the tongue should approach the roof of the mouth.

The ŗ, as in in kaŗš 'war', is pronounced as rh in English 'rheumatic'. The letter was removed from the Latvian alphabet in 1956. It is, however, used in linquistic texts. The ŗ (as well as the ch) is still quite often found in texts published by Latvians living abroad.

The letters f and h occur in loanwords.

1.4 Other Notes
Some sounds are represented by digraphs:

dz = dz as in English 'adz'
dž = g as in English 'age'
The digraph ch (as in the Scottish pronunciation of 'loch') has been replaced by h in post-1956 texts; thus, šahs (= English 'chess') is the contemporary form of šachs.

Word stress is usually on the first syllable of the word. Exceptions to this rule, where the stress is placed on the second syllable, comprise:

a few compound forms, such as pus-otra 'one and a half', lab-vakar 'good evening', pal-dies 'thank you';
superlative forms prefixed by vis-, such as vis-lielākais 'the biggest';
some pronouns and adverbs prefixed with the negation ne- (e.g. ne-kad 'never'), and with the prefixes ik- (e.g. ik-viens 'each and every one') and jeb- (e.g. jeb-kurš 'anyone').
Some speakers of the central dialect, on which standard Latvian is based, have preserved three vowel tones: drawn, falling, broken:

~ drawn, stieptā intonācija, where the pitch gently rises and then rests: ma~te 'mother'
` falling, krītoša intonācija, with a short rise and a long falling pitch: dra`ugs 'friend'
^ broken, lauztā intonācija, with a glottal closure between rise and fall: de^ls 'son'
However, many dialects and most speakers make a distinction only between two vowel tones. In the western central and Tamian dialects, the contrast is between the drawn tone and the non-drawn tone; in the eastern dialects, a contrast is made between falling and non-falling tones. Vowel tones are not indicated in ordinary published materials.

2 The Sound System
Sounds in Latvian may be divided into vowels and consonants. The sounds may be arranged in tables acording to their articulation. Vowels can be classified as follows:

 	 	Front	 	 	 	 	 	Back
High	 	i, ī	 	 	 	 	 	u, ū
Middle	 	e, ē (closed)	 	 	 	 	 	o, ō
Low	 	 	 	e, ē (open)	 	a, ā	 	 
There are two diphthongs gliding from a high vowel to a central mid-low vowel: one front, graphemic ie, and one back, graphemic o.

The table below lists consonant sounds:

 	 	Voiceless	 	Voiced
Plosives	 	p	 	b
 	 	t	 	d
 	 	ķ	 	ģ
 	 	k	 	g
Fricatives	 	f	 	v
 	 	s	 	z
 	 	š	 	ž
 	 	 	 	j
 	 	h	 	 
Affricates	 	c	 	č
 	 	dz	 	dž
Nasals	 	 	 	m
 	 	 	 	n
 	 	 	 	ņ
Liquids	 	 	 	l
 	 	 	 	ļ
Vibrants	 	 	 	r
 	 	 	 	ŗ
The affricates c (t + s), dz (d + z), č (t + š), dž (d + ž) are composite sounds.

Note that the voiced consonant becomes unvoiced before a voiceless consonant. Thus b, g, z may be pronounced p, k, s respectively. For example, labs 'good', zirgs 'horse', lauzt 'to break' are pronounced *laps, *zirks, *laust, respectively.

An unvoiced consonant becomes voiced before a voiced consonant. Thus k, p, s, š, t may be pronounced g, b, z, ž, d respectively. For example nākdams 'coming', kāpdams 'climbing', pusdivi 'half past one', trešdiena 'Wednesday', atdot 'to give back' are pronounced *piedzgade, *nāgdams, *kābdams, *puzdivi, *treždiena, *addot respectively.

The dental nasal n becomes a velar nasal before k and g. The 'nk' and 'ng' sound heard in banka 'bank', banga 'wave', for example, is pronounced as the 'ng' in English 'bank' and 'sing'.

An s before š or č is often assimilated to š, thus: pusčetri 'half past three' is pronounced *puščetri; visšaurākais 'the narrowest' is pronounced *viššaurākais.

A z before ž is often assimilated to ž, thus: izžaut ' to hang out' is pronounced *ižžaut.

At the end of a word the combinations šs and žs are assimilated to š, thus: brašs 'dashing' is pronounced *braš; mežš 'forest' is pronounced *meš.

3 Noun Inflection
Nouns in Latvian are inflected to show their relations with other words and their function in the sentence. Endings play a very important role. They mark number, case, and gender (either masculine or feminine) of the noun. An ending also indicates to which of seven stems a noun belongs. The names of the stems may vary in different grammars. Latvian has six declensions, three masculine (I- III) and three feminine (IV-VI). The ija- stem and the consonant stem are grouped under the 2nd declension.

Stem	 	Nom. Sg.	 	Decl.	 	Examples
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
a-	 	-s, -š	 	I	 	tēvs, 'father', vējš, 'wind'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
ija-	 	-is	 	II	 	brālis, 'brother'
Consonant	 	-ns, -ss	 	 	 	akmens, 'stone', mēness, 'moon'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
u-	 	-us	 	III	 	medus, 'honey'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
ā-	 	-a	 	IV	 	māsa, 'sister'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
ē-	 	-e	 	V	 	māte, 'mother'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
i-	 	-s	 	VI	 	pils, 'palace'
Note that the nominative ending -s is common to both genders. There are, however, many more masculine nouns than feminine nouns with this ending. The masculine -s nouns can be differentiated from the feminine -s nouns by the nominative plural, which is -i for the masculine noun and -is for the feminine noun.

Proper names all belong to a declension class, have gender, and are inflected. Proper names of foreign origin are spelt in Latvian according to their pronunciation and take gender endings. For example:

Berlīne 'Berlin'
Valters 'Walter'
Tomass 'Thomas'
Ņujorka 'New York'
Kārlis 'Carl'
Ilze 'Ilse'
Amerika 'America'
There are six cases in Latvian: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, locative, vocative. The vocative is used to address persons, animate beings, or inanimate things used figuratively. In the singular, it is usually similar to the nominative or else has no ending. In the plural, the vocative of all nouns has the same ending as the nominative. The vocative is usually not included in declension paradigms.

Some Latvian grammars also regard the instrumental as a separate case. The endings of the instrumental correspond to those of the accusative in the singular and the dative in the plural. The instrumental case will not be listed in this presentation.

3.1 First Declension
The first declension is the most common declension of masculine nouns. The nouns of this class are labeled as a/ja-stems (Indo-European o- and jo-stems). The a-type used to have a short a before the ending, thus tēvs < *tēvas. The short a of the stem is still found in the dative singular tēvam. Nouns that end with the -ja- stem are bundled together with the a-stem group, for example vējš < *vējas.

The paradigms below are for the first declension nouns tēvs 'father' and vējš 'wind'.

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom	 	tēvs, vējš	 	tēvi, vēji
Gen	 	tēva, vēja	 	tēvu, vēju
Dat	 	tēvam, vējam	 	tēviem, vējiem
Acc	 	tēvu, vēju	 	tēvus, vējus
Loc	 	tēvā, vējā	 	tēvos, vējos
3.2 Fourth Declension
The great majority of feminine nouns belong to the fourth declension. These nouns are referred to as ā-stems, since in older forms the root ended with ā, for example Nom. Sg. liepa < *liepā 'linden tree'. The long ā is still found in the Loc. Sg. liepā, Dat. Pl. liepām and Loc. Pl. liepās.

A few nouns of the fourth declension refer to male persons, and they are declined like the feminine nouns of the 4th declension except for the dative singular, which has -am as the ending instead of -ai. See example below. The same applies to common nouns with the ending -a: tiepša 'a stubborn person' (Nom. Sg., Fem. or Masc.); tiepšai (Dat. Sg. Fem.), tiepšam (Dat. Sg. Masc.).

The paradigms below are for the fourth declension nouns māsa 'sister', puika 'boy'.

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom	 	māsa, puika	 	māsas, puikas
Gen	 	māsas, puikas	 	māsu, puiku
Dat	 	māsai, puikam	 	māsām, puikām
Acc	 	māsu, puiku	 	māsas, puikas
Loc	 	māsā, puikā	 	māsās, puikās
The earlier form of the Dat. Sg. had the ending -i, which has still been retained in some Latvian dialects. Traces of this form can be found in Standard Latvian, for example, in the adverbial expressions patiesi 'truly', lieti derēt 'quite useful'. The present dative singular ending -ai has been taken over from the demonstrative pronouns tai 'that' (Dat. Sg. Fem.), šai 'this' (Dat. Sg. Fem.).

4 Verb Inflection
Verbs are inflected for number, person, tense, voice, and mood. Verbs are either singular or plural; the older dual form has disappeared. The first and second person endings show not only person but also number, for example the 1st singular present redz-u 'I see', 1st plural redz-am 'we see'. The 3rd person singular and the 3rd person plural are the same in all tenses in Latvian; for example: pērk 'he, she buys, they (Masc., Fem.) buy'.

Verbs have two voices: active (unmarked) and passive. The passive is formed by the auxiliary verbs tikt/tapt/kļūt 'to become' or būt 'to be' and the past passive participle.

Latvian has six tenses: simple present, simple past (preterit), and simple future, and the three compound tenses in the present, past and future, which are formed with participles.

Latvian has five moods: indicative (which is unmarked), imperative, debitive, subjunctive (in some grammars called conditional), and relative.

Verbs can be transitive or intransitive. There are many verbs than can be both transitive and intransitive. For example:

Transitive: suns rej ceļinieku = 'dog barks (at the) traveller'
Intransitive: suns rej = 'dog barks'
Impersonal verbs have no agent and are found only in the third person: līst 'it rains, it is raining', snieg 'it snows, it is snowing'.

4.1 Verb Stems
The infinitive ending of the verb is -t (-ties in the reflexive). The infinitive is usually the only verb form listed in Latvian dictionaries.

To generate the different Latvian verb forms, it is necessary to know the infinitive stem, the present stem, and the past (preterit) stem of the verb.

The infinitive stem is formed by dropping the -t/-ties ending of the verb. From this stem, the following can be constructed:

the infinitive
the simple future
the subjunctive
the past passive participle (-ts)
the -dams participle
The present stem is formed by dropping the 1st person singular ending -u of the verb in the simple present. From this stem, the following can be constructed:

the simple present
the debitive
the imperative
the relative
the present active participle (-ošs)
the present passive participle (-ams)
the -ot participle
the -am participle
The past stem is formed by dropping the 1st person singular ending -u of the verb in the past tense. From this stem, the following can be constructed:

the simple past (indicative)
the past active participle (-is)
4.2 Verb Conjugation Classes
4.2.1 Class I

Primary verbs that have one syllable in the infinitive, and where the first singular in the present and past tenses consists of two syllables, belong to the first conjugation. This conjugation forms a closed class (no longer productive) of basic vocabulary with no derivations. The stems can differ and the forms may show different morphonological alternations, such as the ablaut, insertion, etc. See examples below. Irregular verbs belonging to this conjugation are būt 'to be', dot 'to give', iet 'to go'.

Note that prefixes and the reflexive ending -ies of the infinitive are not counted in the stem. Thus for example the following verbs all belong to the class I conjugation: mest 'to throw', aizmest 'to throw away', mesties 'to throw oneself'. Class I verbs may also be labeled as the short conjugation.

I	 	Infinitive	 	1st Person	 	Present	 	Past
 	 	mest	 	Sg:	 	met-u	 	met-u
 	 	'to throw'	 	Pl:	 	met-am	 	met-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	pirkt	 	Sg:	 	pērk-u	 	pirk-u
 	 	'to buy'	 	Pl:	 	pērk-am	 	pirk-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	siet	 	Sg:	 	sien-u	 	sēj-u
 	 	'to bind'	 	Pl:	 	sien-am	 	sēj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	glābt	 	Sg:	 	glābj-u	 	glāb-u
 	 	'to save'	 	Pl:	 	glābj-am	 	glāb-ām'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	trūkt	 	Sg:	 	trūkst-u	 	trūk-u
 	 	'to lack'	 	Pl:	 	trūkst-am	 	trūk-ām
4.2.2 Class II

Verbs with at least two syllables in the infinitive, and where the number of syllables in the present stem is identical to the number of syllables in the past stem, belong to the second conjugation. All stems are identical with no morphonological alternations. See examples below. This is an open (productive) class with derivations, and most borrowings appear here. Examples: studēt 'to study', diskutēt 'to discuss'. The verb dabūt 'to get' belongs to this conjugation. Class II verbs may also labeled as the long conjugation.

II	 	Infinitive	 	1st Person	 	Present	 	Past
 	 	runāt	 	Sg:	 	runāj-u	 	runāj-u
 	 	'to speak'	 	Pl:	 	runāj-am	 	runāj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	gatavot	 	Sg:	 	gatavoj-u	 	gatavoj-u
 	 	'to prepare'	 	Pl:	 	gatavoj-am	 	gatavoj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	svētīt	 	Sg:	 	svētīj-u	 	svētīj-u
 	 	'to bless'	 	Pl:	 	svētīj-am	 	svētīj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	audzēt	 	Sg:	 	audzēj-u	 	audzēj-u
 	 	'to grow'	 	Pl:	 	audzēj-am	 	audzēj-ām
4.2.3 Class III

Verbs which have at least two syllables in the infinitive, and where the number of syllables in the past stem is one more than the number of syllables in the present stem belong to the third conjugation. The infinitive and past stem are identical and the forms may show morphonological consonant alternation. This is a partially open class with derivations. Since the principle forms are short in the present tense, but long in the past tense and the infinitive, for example redz- (pres), redzē-j- (past). redzē- (inf) 'to see', this conjugation is also labeled the mixed conjugation.

III	 	Infinitive	 	1st Person	 	Present	 	Past
 	 	audzināt	 	Sg:	 	audzin-u	 	audzināj-u
 	 	'to protect'	 	Pl:	 	audzin-ām	 	audzināj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	dalīt	 	Sg:	 	dal-u	 	dalīj-u
 	 	'to divide'	 	Pl:	 	dal-ām	 	dalīj-ām
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	turēt	 	Sg:	 	tur-u	 	turēj-u
 	 	'to hold'	 	Pl:	 	tur-am	 	turēj-ām
4.3 Present and Preterit Tense Endings in Indicative Active
Three sets of endings are encountered, here labelled A, B, C:

 	 	 	 	A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	B	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 
 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.	 	 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.	 	 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	-u	 	 	 	-am	 	 	 	-u	 	 	 	-am	 	 	 	-u	 	 	 	-ām
2nd	 	-ø	 	 	 	-at	 	 	 	-i	 	 	 	-at	 	 	 	-i	 	 	 	-āt
3rd	 	 	 	-ø	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	-ø	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	-a	 	 
In general it can be said that verbs of the Class I conjugation follow mainly subset A, infrequently subset B. The Class II conjugation always follows subset A. Verbs of the Class III conjugation ending in -ēt- follow subset B. Those ending in -āt- or -īt- follow subset C. Subset C is used for all preterit forms in all conjugations.

Many grammars bundle subset A and subset B endings into one paradigm, with subset C falling into another:

 	 	 	 	1 (A+B)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	2 (C)	 	 
 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.	 	 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	-u	 	 	 	-am	 	 	 	-u	 	 	 	-ām
2nd	 	-ø/-i	 	 	 	-at	 	 	 	-i	 	 	 	-āt
3rd	 	 	 	-ø	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	-a	 	 
4.4 Present Tense Class I (Short Conjugation)
Note that in Latvian, the corresponding English translation for the present tense can be both simple present or continuous present, for example: pērk-u 'I buy, I am buying'.

The Class I (short) conjugation is the most complicated of the three conjugation types. Some examples of subclasses of Class I verbs are seen under 4.2.1 above. This conjugation can be broken down into five subclasses, and some grammars present up to fifteen subgroups under each subclass, depending upon which vocalic and consonantal changes are studied.

4.4.1 First subclass

Verbs which form the stem of the present tense with -a- (bēg-a-m 'we flee', sāk-a-m 'we start') and where the root vowel remains unchanged, belong to the first subclass.

Infinitive: augt 'to grow'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	augu	 	 	 	augam
2nd	 	audz	 	 	 	augat
3rd	 	 	 	aug	 	 
4.4.2 Second subclass

Verbs which form the stem of the present tense with -a- and where the root vowel is either -e-, -ē- or -ie-, and where the root vowel changes to -i- in the other principle forms, belong to the second subclass. Example: inf. vilkt 'to pull', 1st sg. pres. velku 'I pull', 1st sg. past vilku 'I pulled'. This vowel alternation is a remainder of the Indo-European vowel alternation.

Infinitive: likt 'to put'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	lieku	 	 	 	liekam
2nd	 	liec	 	 	 	liekat
3rd	 	 	 	liek	 	 
4.4.3 Third subclass

Verbs which once were formed with the infix -n- and which today have a changed vowel in the root of the present tense as a result of the -n- merging with the preceding vowel (-an- > o; -en- > -ie-, -in- > -ī-; -un- > -ū-) belong to the third subclass. Example: inf krist 'to fall', 1st sg pres krītu < *krintō.

Infinitive: zagt 'to steal'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	zogu	 	 	 	zogam
2nd	 	zodz	 	 	 	zogat
3rd	 	 	 	zog	 	 
Verbs with the present stem ending in p, t, and d have the ending -i in the 2nd person singular (=subset B).

Infinitive: prast 'to know'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	protu	 	 	 	protam
2nd	 	proti	 	 	 	protat
3rd	 	 	 	prot	 	 
This subclass also includes verbs with the -n- suffix.

Infinitive: skriet 'to run'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	skrienu	 	 	 	skrienam
2nd	 	skrien	 	 	 	skrienat
3rd	 	 	 	skrien	 	 
4.4.4 Fourth subclass

Verbs which form the present tense with the suffix -j- belong to the fourth subclass. This -j- causes the palatalization of the preceding consonant in all persons except the 2nd sg. (See section 6.0). Example: inf bāzt (<bāzjō) 'to shove', 1st sg bāžu 'I shove', 2nd sg bāz 'you shove'.

Infinitive: kāpt 'to climb'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	kāpju	 	 	 	kāpjam
2nd	 	kāp	 	 	 	kāpjat
3rd	 	 	 	kāpj	 	 
Verb stems ending in a vowel or diphthong have -j- in all persons of the present tense and in all forms derived from the present stem.

Infinitive: pļaut 'to reap'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	pļauju	 	 	 	pļaujam
2nd	 	pļauj	 	 	 	pļaujat
3rd	 	 	 	pļauj	 	 
4.4.5 Fifth subclass

Verbs which have the suffix -st- in the present tense belong to the fifth subclass. All fifth subclass verbs end in -i- in the 2nd sg (=subset B). All verbs are intransitive and often denote a change in state or position.

Infinitive: kļūt 'to become'

 	 	Sg.	 	Sg/Pl.	 	Pl.
1st	 	kļūstu	 	 	 	kļūstam
2nd	 	kļūsti	 	 	 	kļūstat
3rd	 	 	 	kļūst	 	 
4.5 Present Tense Class II (Long Conjugation)
Verbs of the second conjugation can be divided into four subgroups according to their infinitive suffixes: -āt, -ēt, -īt, -ōt. The suffix, as it appears in the 1st person plural, determines the verb stem:

Subgroup	 	Infinitive	 	1 Pl.	 	Stem
1st	 	run-āt 'to speak'	 	run-āja-m	 	āja-stem
2nd	 	audz-ēt 'to cultivate'	 	audz-ēja-m	 	ēja-stem
3rd	 	svēt-īt 'to bless'	 	svēt-īja-m	 	īja-stem
4th	 	gatav-ōt 'to prepare'	 	gatav-ōja-m	 	ōja-stem
The first person ending in the singular in all tenses is -u. The -j- is inserted between the root and the ending in order to prevent hiatus, a combination of two vowels which do not constitute a diphthong.

The second person ending in the singular present is zero, since not only the older -i ending (shortened from the even older -ie) has fallen away, but also the previous -j- has fallen away; for example: meklē < *meklēji < *meklējie 'you (sg) seek'; ogo < *ogōji < *ogōjie 'you (sg) pick berries'.

The third person ending in the singular and plural present is also zero, since not only the older -a ending has fallen away, but also the previous -j- has fallen away; for example: mazgā < *mazgāj < *mazgāja 'he, she, they wash'.

Examples of the present tense of Class II, 1st, 2nd and 4th subgroups are:

Class II	 	1st	 	2nd	 	4th
Infin.	 	runāt 'to speak'	 	audzēt 'to cultivate'	 	gatavot 'to prepare'
1 Sg.	 	runāju	 	audzēju	 	gatavoju
2 Sg.	 	runā	 	audzē	 	gatavo
3 Sg.	 	runā	 	audzē	 	gatavo
1 Pl.	 	runājam	 	audzējam	 	gatavojam
2 Pl.	 	runājat	 	audzējat	 	gatavojat
3 Pl.	 	runā	 	audzē	 	gatavo
4.5.1 The Third Subgroup -īja-stems

The -īja-stems are a dwindling subgroup of the class II conjugation. Verbs of this subgroup have gradually migrated over into the historical -ā-stems of the class III conjugation. This is an ongoing process, and many verbs that a century ago were regarded as -īja-stems definitely belong to the ā-stems today, for example zvanīt 'to ring', tīrīt 'to clean', postīt 'to destroy'.

There are currently eleven verbs in the -īja-stem subgroup, of which four can be conjugated according to both the -īja-stem and the ā-stem paradigms. For example:

Infinitive svētīt 'to bless', 1st sg svētīju or svētu

 	 	Class II	 	 	 	Class III
1 Sg.	 	svētīju	 	or	 	svētu 'I bless'
2 Sg.	 	svētī	 	or	 	svēti
3 Sg.	 	svētī	 	or	 	svēta
1 Pl.	 	svētījam	 	or	 	svētām
2 Pl.	 	svēt'jat	 	or	 	svētāt
3 Pl.	 	svētī	 	or	 	svēta
Other examples include: cienīt 'to respect', 1st sg cienīju or cienu; pētīt 'to investigate', 1st sg pētīju or pētu; veltīt 'to dedicate' 1st sg veltīju or veltu.

4.5.2 The verb dabūt 'to get'

The verb dabūt 'to get, to receive, to obtain' is conjugated as a class II verb with -ū- in all forms:

1 Sg.	 	dabūju 'I get, receive, obtain'
2 Sg.	 	dabū
3 Sg.	 	dabū
1 Pl.	 	dabūjam
2 Pl.	 	dabūjat
3 Pl.	 	dabū
4.6 Present Tense Class III (Mixed Conjugation)
Verbs of the third conjugation can be divided into three subgroups, according to their infinitive suffixes -ēt, -īt and -ināt.

4.6.1 The -ēt subgroup

Two types of verbs have merged into the -ēt subgroup: the historical a-stems, for example tecēt 'to flow', tekam 'we flow', and the historical i-stems, for example gulēt 'to sleep', guļu < *guljō 'I sleep', guļam < *gulim 'we sleep', guļat < *gulit 'you (pl) sleep'.

Verbs ending in -ēt follow subset B endings in the present (see section 4.3).

Infinitives: dzirdēt 'to hear', gribēt 'to want'

1 Sg.	 	dzirdu	 	gribu
2 Sg.	 	dzirdi	 	gribi
3 Sg.	 	dzird	 	grib
1 Pl.	 	dzirdam	 	gribam
2 Pl.	 	dzirdat	 	gribat
3 Pl.	 	dzird	 	grib
4.6.2 The -īt subgroup (historical ā-stem)

Verbs ending in -īt follow subset C endings in the present tense (see section 4.3). The first person singular has the ending -u, which has been shortened from the older -au, for example saku < *sakau 'I say'. The second person singular has the ending -i, which has been shortened from -ai, for example dari < *darai 'you (sg) do' (cf. Lithuanian darai). The 3rd person singular ending -a has been shortened from the older -ā, for example raksta <* rakstā 'he, she, they write'.

Verbs that have a dz or c before -īt retain g or k, respectively, in all present forms. This however does not apply to the verbs mīcīt 'to knead' or mācīt 'to teach', which retain the c in all present forms.

Infinitives: lasīt 'to read', sacīt 'to say'

1 Sg.	 	lasu	 	saku
2 Sg.	 	lasi	 	saki
3 Sg.	 	lasa	 	saka
1 Pl.	 	lasām	 	sakām
2 Pl.	 	lasāt	 	sakāt
3 Pl.	 	lasa	 	saka
4.6.3 The -ināt subgroup

Verbs ending in -ināt follow subset C endings in the present (see section 4.3). Four verbs with -āt in the infinitive also belong to this group: sargāt 'to protect', zināt 'to know', dziedāt 'to sing', raudāt 'to cry'. The latter two verbs follow subset B endings in the present.

Infinitives: audzināt 'to foster', raudāt 'to cry'

1 Sg.	 	audzinu	 	raudu
2 Sg.	 	audzini	 	raudi
3 Sg.	 	audzina	 	raud
1 Pl.	 	audzinām	 	raudam
2 Pl.	 	audzināt	 	raudat
3 Pl.	 	audzina	 	raud
5 Word Order
The most common word order of a neutral declarative sentence is Subject + Verb + Object; example: Es tulkoju grāmatas. 'I translate books'. Adjective/adverbial modifiers are placed before the governing word, example: Es ātri tulkoju labas grāmatas. 'I quickly translate good books'.

However, since Latvian is a language with a case system, word order is rather changeable. Thus, the following are all possible and grammatically correct (='Mother woke the children early today'):

Māte šodien agri modināja bērnus 'mother, today, early, woke, children'.
Šodien māte bērnus agri modināja 'today, mother, childern, early, woke'.
Māte modināja šodien bērnus agri 'mother, woke, today, children, early'.
However, each sentence conveys a different meaning, since emphasis gets placed on the first word in a sentence. A difference in style is also apparent due to the change in word order.

Word order is not free in interrogative sentences: the interrogative particle vai or the interrogative prounouns (kas, ko, etc.) and adverbs (kur, cik, kad) are always placed in first position. Examples: Vai tu arvien baro cūkas? 'Are you still feeding the pigs?', Kāpēc tu nedejo? 'Why aren't you dancing?'

Lesson 9: Latvian
Lilita Zalkalns, Peteris Vanags, and Jonathan Slocum
Poet, writer, literary critic and publicist Edvarts Virza (pseudonym of Edvarts Lieknis, 1883-1940) was born in Zemgale, a region known for its rich farming land and well-to-do homesteads. He was the oldest of nine children, and he passed his childhood and youth in relative affluence. His budding literary talent was nurtured by his Bohemian grandfather, who was a great story-teller, and his grandmother, who knew all about herbs and doctoring, local legends and folklore.

His parents' financial situation was such that, after finishing Bauska municipal school in 1901, Virza was able to return home and live at the "Billites" farmstead. It was in Billites that he felt best, and here he could immerse himself in Russian Symbolist and Decadent poetry and devote himself to the study of French language and literature. His first volume of poetry, The Chalice (1907), is a striking example of Latvian symbolism, a world of darkness, fateful passion and spiritual loneliness. Lighter, sunnier lyrics were published in his next volume of poetry, The Divine Games (1919). A mutual love of France and all things French bought Virza together with the noted poet, musician and translator Elza Sterste (1885-1976). She was unfailing in her support of Virza, creating and maintaining the conditions for fostering her husband's talent.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The idealization of country life and the image of the hardworking and God-fearing farmer was a common concept appearing in the neo-romantic literatures of the late 19th to early 20th centuries. The impulse to glorify pastoral life was also felt and expressed in much of Latvian literature of the 1920's and 1930's, a movement which reflected the political culture surrounding the authoritarian president Kārlis Ulmanis (1877-1942), who dissolved Latvia's parliament in a 1934 coup d'etat. Virza fully believed in the political and social ideals represented by Ulmanis; he believed that Latvia should be an agriculturally based one-party state, lead by a strong leader.

Virza's prose poem "Straumeni: The Story of an Old Farm in Zemgale through the Changing Seasons," was first published as a series in the literary monthly Daugava between 1929 and 1933, and to date has been republished and reprinted over twenty times. This prose poem represents the purest essence of the Latvian patriarchal farmstead and depicts Virza's deep devotion to and love of the Latvian soil and the Latvian farmer. This epic gains its strength from Virza's virtuouso use of language, including the use of the third person only. There is almost no conversation in the entire work. Everything takes place as though seen by the eyes of the reader, who, like a traveller, is led through fields and over meandering streams in and around the Straumeni homestead and is invited to rest under the shade of the huge, leafy old trees and listen to the story of the old homestead, of the land and the country, and of the passing of generations now gone.

Vectēvs mīlēja viens pats apkalpot savu bišu baznīcu, jo bites viņu mīlēja un padevās viņa rīcībā.
 Collapse All
vectēvs -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <vectēvs> grandfather -- grandfather
mīlēja -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <mīlēt, mīlu, mīlēju> love -- loved
viens -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viens> one, alone -- ...
pats -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <pats> himself -- by himself
apkalpot -- verb; infinitive of <apkalpot, apkalpoju, apkalpoju> serve -- to attend to
savu -- pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <sava> his -- his
bišu -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <bite> bee -- bee
baznīcu -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <baznīca> church -- church
jo -- adverb; <jo> because -- because
bites -- noun, feminine; nominative plural of <bite> bee -- the bees
viņu -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- him
mīlēja -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <mīlēt, mīlu, mīlēju> love -- loved
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
padevās -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <padoties, padodos, padevos> surrender, succumb -- yielded to
viņa -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <viņš> he -- his
rīcībā -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <rīcība> at someone's disposal -- care

Varbūt tas bija tāpēc, ka viņš pamazām tuvojās tam vecumam, kad cilvēku atstāj viss, kas nepatīkams viņa miesā un garā.
 Collapse All
Varbūt -- particle; <varbūt> perhaps, maybe, possibly -- perhaps
tas -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- this
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- was (so)
tāpēc -- adverb; <tāpēc> therefore, because -- because
ka -- conjunction; <ka> that -- ...
viņš -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
pamazām -- adverb; <pamazām> gradually, little by little -- gradually
tuvojās -- verb; 3rd person preterit reflexive of <tuvoties, tuvojos, tuvojos> approach -- was... approaching
tam -- demonstrative pronoun; dative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
vecumam -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <vecums> age -- age
kad -- adverb; <kad> when -- when
cilvēku -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <cilvēks> person, human being -- a person
atstāj -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <atstāt, atstāju, atstāju> leave, depart, abandon -- departs from
viss -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viss> all, everything -- everything
kas -- pronoun; nominative singular of <kas> that -- that
nepatīkams -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; nominative singular masculine present passive participle of <patikt, patīku, patiku> to like -- is unpleasant
viņa -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <viņš> he -- to the
miesā -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <miesa> flesh, body -- body
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
garā -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <garš> spirit -- spirit

Debess un gadu saules bija viņa stāvu izžāvējušas, padarot to līdzīgu ilgi un lēni kaltētam liepas kokam, no kā vecie latvieši taisīja savas skanīgās kokles.
 Collapse All
debess -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <debess> heaven, sky -- the heavens
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
gadu -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <gads> year -- over the years
saules -- noun, feminine; nominative plural of <saule> sun, sunlight, sunshine -- the sun
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- had
viņa -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <viņš> he -- his
stāvu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <stāvs> stature, figure, frame -- body
izžāvējušas -- verb; plural feminine past active participle of <izžāvēt, izžāvēju, izžāvēju> dry out -- dried out
padarot -- verb; present active ot-gerund of <padarīt, padaru, padaŗiju> to do, make -- making
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- it
līdzīgu -- adjective; accusative singular masculine of <līdzīgs> similar, equal to -- like
ilgi -- adverb; <ilgi> long, for a long time -- ...
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- ...
lēni -- adverb; <lēni> slow -- slowly
kaltētam -- verb; dative singular masculine past passive participle of <kaltēt, kaltēju, kaltēju> to dry -- cured
liepas -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <liepa> linden tree -- of the linden tree
kokam -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <koks> tree, wood -- wood
no -- preposition; <no> from -- from
kā -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <kas> which -- which
vecie -- definite adjective; nominative plural masculine of <vecs> old -- the ancient
latvieši -- noun, masculine; nominative plural of <latvietis> Latvian -- Latvians
taisīja -- verb; 3rd person plural preterit of <taisīt, taisu, taisīju> to make -- made
savas -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <sava> one's -- their
skanīgās -- definite adjective; accusative plural feminine of <skanīga> sonorous -- sonorous
kokles -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <kokle> kokle, traditional music instrument -- kokles

Jūnija mēnesī, kad bija spietošanas laiks, viņu arvien redzēja uz trepītēm pakāpušos rīkojamies ap kokiem, neapsegtu seju, ar dūlāgu rokā, un tur, lēni runādamies, viņš apvārdoja savas Dieva gotiņas.
 Collapse All
jūnija -- noun, masculine; genitive singular <jūnijs> June -- in June
mēnesī -- noun, masculine; locative singular <mēnesis> month -- ...
kad -- adverb; <kad> when -- when
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- it was
spietošanas -- noun, feminine; genitive singular <spietošana> swarming -- swarming
laiks -- noun, masculine; nominative singular <laiks> time, period -- season
viņu -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
arvien -- adverb; <arvien> all the time, the whole time -- always
redzēja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <redzēt, redzu, redzēju> to see -- could... be seen
uz -- preposition; <uz> on, upon -- on
trepītēm -- noun, feminine; dative plural of <trepītes> step ladder -- the step ladder
pakāpušos -- verb; accusative singular masculine active past participle reflexive of <pakāpties, pakāpjos, pakāpos> to step up -- standing
rīkojamies -- verb; present active am-gerund reflexive of <rīkoties, rīkojos, rīkojos> to busy one's self, act, behave -- working
ap -- preposition; <ap> around, by, near, about -- among
kokiem -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <koks> tree, wood -- the trees
neapsegtu -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; accusative singular feminine past passive participle of <apsegt, apsedzu, apsedzu> to cover -- uncovered
seju -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <seja> face -- (his) face
ar -- preposition; <ar> with, together, and -- with
dūlāgu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <dūlāgs> smoke stick -- a smoking branch
rokā -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <roka> hand -- in hand
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
tur -- adverb; <tur> there -- there
lēni -- adverb; <lēni> slow -- softly
runādamies -- verb; nominative singular masculine present active dams-gerund reflexive of <runāties, runājos, runājos> to talk to one's self -- talking
viņš -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
apvārdoja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <apvārdot, apvārdoju, apvārdoju> to charm -- would weave a spell on
savas -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <sava> one's -- ...
dieva -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <dievs> god -- god's
gotiņas -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <gotiņa> little cow -- little creatures

Neviena saime viņam neaizbēga, un ja kāda bērnus laižot taisījās uz laišanos, viņš to apmierināja, uzlaizdams tai ūdeni no šļīcenes, kas bija izmaukta no jaunas priedītes galotnes.
 Collapse All
neviena -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <neviena> nobody, no one, not a single -- not a single
saime -- noun, feminine; nominative singular of <saime> family -- bee colony
viņam -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- from him
neaizbēga -- negative particle; <ne> not + verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <aizbēgt, aizbēgu, aizbēgu> to flee -- (n)ever escaped
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
ja -- conjunction; <ja> if -- if
kāda -- pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <kāda> someone, anyone -- (a colony)
bērnus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <bērns> child -- (its) brood
laižot -- verb; present ot-gerund of <laist, laižu, laidu> to release -- releasing
taisījās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <taisīties, taisos, taisījos> to prepare one's self -- was preparing
uz -- preposition; <uz> on, for -- to
laišanos -- reflexive noun; accusative singular feminine of <laišanās> departing -- fly away
viņš -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular feminine of <tas, tā> that -- it
apmierināja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <apmierināt, apmierinu, apmierināju> to satisfy, calm down -- calmed... down
uzlaizdams -- verb; nominative singular masculine present active dams-gerund of <uzlaist, uzlaižu, uzlaidu> to set on -- by hosing
tai -- demonstrative pronoun; dative singular feminine of <tas, tā> that -- it
ūdeni -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <ūdens> water -- with water
no -- preposition; <no> from -- from
šļīcenes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <šļīcene> hose -- a hose
kas -- pronoun; nominative singular of <kas> that -- that
bija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- was
izmaukta -- verb; accusative singular feminine past passive participle of <izmaukt, izmaucu, izmaucu> hollowed out, carved from -- made
no -- preposition; <no> from -- from
jaunas -- adjective; genitive singular feminine of <jauna> young, new -- of a young
priedītes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <priedīte> pine -- pine tree
galotnes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <galotne> top, summit -- the top

Tā viņš tur kustējās balti balinātās pakulu biksēs, baltā atloku kreklā, siksnu apjozies, ar katru gadu vairāk līdzinādamies vecajam senču Dieviņam, zibinādams savas zem biezām uzacīm nogrimušās acis.
 Collapse All
tā -- adverb; <tā> so, thus -- so
viņš -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
tur -- adverb; <tur> there -- ...
kustējās -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit reflexive of <kustēties, kustos, kustējos> to move around, work -- worked
balti -- adverb; <balti> white -- white
balinātās -- verb; locative plural feminine past passive participle of <balināt, balinu, balināju> to bleach -- in bleached
pakulu -- noun, feminine; genitive plural of <pakula> coarse linen -- coarse linen
biksēs -- noun, feminine; locative plural of <bikses> trousers -- trousers
baltā -- adjective; locative plural masculine of <balts> white -- a white
atloku -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <atloks> collar -- collared
kreklā -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <krekls> shirt -- shirt
siksnu -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <siksna> belt -- a belt
apjozies -- verb; nominative singular masculine reflexive past active participle of <apjozt, apjožu, apjozu> to gird (round) -- around his waist
ar -- preposition; <ar> with, together, and -- with
katru -- pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <katrs> each, every -- every
gadu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <gads> year -- (passing) year
vairāk -- adverb; <vairāk> more, increasingly -- increasingly
līdzinādamies -- verb; nominative singular masculine reflexive present active dams-gerund of <līdzināt, līdzinu, līdzināju> to be similar to -- becoming... similar
vecajam -- definite adjective; dative singular masculine of <vecais> the old -- to the old
senču -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <sencis> ancestor -- of his ancestors
Dieviņam -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <dievins> God -- God
zibinādams -- verb; nominative singular masculine present active dams-gerund of <zibināt, zibinu, zibināju> to flash -- flashing
savas -- pronoun; accusative plural feminine of <sava> his -- his
zem -- preposition; <zem> under, beneath -- beneath
biezām -- adjective; dative plural feminine of <bieza> thick -- (his) thick
uzacīm -- noun, feminine; dative plural of <uzacs> eyebrow -- eyebrows
nogrimušās -- verb; locative plural feminine past active participle of <nogrimt, nogrimu, nogrimu> to sink -- sunk
acis -- noun, feminine; accusative plural of <acs> eye -- eyes

Lesson Text
Vectēvs mīlēja viens pats apkalpot savu bišu baznīcu, jo bites viņu mīlēja un padevās viņa rīcībā. Varbūt tas bija tāpēc, ka viņš pamazām tuvojās tam vecumam, kad cilvēku atstāj viss, kas nepatīkams viņa miesā un garā. Debess un gadu saules bija viņa stāvu izžāvējušas, padarot to līdzīgu ilgi un lēni kaltētam liepas kokam, no kā vecie latvieši taisīja savas skanīgās kokles. Jūnija mēnesī, kad bija spietošanas laiks, viņu arvien redzēja uz trepītēm pakāpušos rīkojamies ap kokiem, neapsegtu seju, ar dūlāgu rokā, un tur, lēni runādamies, viņš apvārdoja savas Dieva gotiņas. Neviena saime viņam neaizbēga, un ja kāda bērnus laižot taisījās uz laišanos, viņš to apmierināja, uzlaizdams tai ūdeni no šļīcenes, kas bija izmaukta no jaunas priedītes galotnes. Tā viņš tur kustējās balti balinātās pakulu biksēs, baltā atloku kreklā, siksnu apjozies, ar katru gadu vairāk līdzinādamies vecajam senču Dieviņam, zibinādams savas zem biezām uzacīm nogrimušās acis.
Translation
Grandfather loved to attend to his bee church, by himself, because the bees loved him and yielded to his care. Perhaps this was so because he was gradually approaching the age when everything that is unpleasant to the body and spirit departs from a person. Over the years the heavens and the sun had dried out his body, making it like the slowly-cured wood of the linden tree, from which the ancient Latvians made their sonorous "kokles" [a traditional music instrument]. In June, when it was swarming season, he could always be seen standing on the step ladder, working among the trees, his face uncovered, holding a smoking branch, and there, talking softly, he would weave a spell on God's little creatures. Not a single bee colony ever escaped from him, and if a colony releasing its brood was preparing to fly away, he calmed it down by hosing it with water from a hose that was made from the top of a young pine tree. So he worked in bleached white coarse linen trousers, a white collared shirt, a belt around his waist, with every passing year becoming increasingly similar to the old God of his ancestors, his eyes flashing, sunk beneath his thick eyebrows.
Grammar
6 Dipthongs
6.1 Pure Diphthongs
There are ten pure diphthongs in Latvian, namely:

 	 	/ai/ /au/
 	 	/ei/ /eu/
 	 	/ie/ (or /ia/) /iu/
 	 	/ou/ /oi/
 	 	/ui/ /uo/ (or /ua/)
Six of the diphthongs are found in words of Latvian origin:

 	 	/ai/ /au/
 	 	/ei/ /ie/ (or /ia/)
 	 	/uo/ (or /ua/) /eu/
The first five diphthongs are the most common in Latvian. For example:

 	 	/ai/	 	saime 'household'
 	 	/au/	 	lauks 'field'
 	 	/ei/	 	teika 'tale'
 	 	/ie/	 	liels 'large'
 	 	/uo/	 	noma 'rent'
(Graphemic o corresponds here to /uo/ or /ua/. See section 1.2).

The /eu/ is a result of a vocalization in Latvian words, where /v/ is transformed to /u/ if preceded by a short vowel in the same syllable. It is written as -ev, for example: tev /teu/ 'for you', sev /seu/ '-self'. In most borrowed words, the diphthong is replaced by 'ei', for example: Eiropa 'Europe', pneimonija 'pneumonia'.

Two of the diphthongs are found only in foreign loan words, for example:

 	 	/oi/	 	boikots 'boycott'
 	 	/ou/	 	džouls 'joule'
Two of the diphthongs are found in words of Finno-Ugric and Slavic origin, or in onomatopoetic words, for example:

 	 	/iu/	 	pliukšķēt 'to splash'
 	 	/ui/	 	muižnieks 'landlord'
6.2 Semi-diphthongs
Besides the pure diphthongs mentioned in 6.1, there are also semi-diphthongs (or mixed diphthongs), in which the vowels a, e, i or u are followed by r, l, ļ or m (+ consonant). For example:

 	 	dzert 'to drink'	 	bars 'crowd'	 	cirpt 'to shear'
 	 	kurmis 'mole'	 	dzelt 'to sting'	 	salms 'straw'
 	 	svilpe 'whistle'	 	mulda 'trough'	 	siļķe 'herring'
 	 	lemt 'to decide,	 	grimt 'to sink'	 	tumsa 'darkness'
The semi-diphthongs form intonational units in the same way as the pure diphthongs, and are therefore customarily regarded as diphthongs in Baltic linguistic tradition.

7 Noun Declensions
7.1 Second Declension
Masculine nouns that have the ending -is in the nominative singular belong to the second declension. The nouns of this class belong to the ija- (Indo-European ijo-) stem. They have consonant palatalization in the genitive singular and in all cases in the plural with either a -j- after the consonant at the end of the stem or the -j- merged with the preceding consonant.

The following pattern of sound alterations is established, for example:

 	 	 	 	Nominative singular	 	Nominative plural
 	 	l > ļ	 	gailis 'rooster'	 	gaiļi <*gailji
 	 	n > ņ	 	spainis 'bucket'	 	spaiņi <*spainji
 	 	s > š	 	mēnesis 'month'	 	mēneši
 	 	t > š	 	latvietis 'Latvian'	 	latvieši
 	 	d > ž	 	nazis 'knife'	 	naži
 	 	z > ž	 	briedis 'deer'	 	brieži
 	 	c > č	 	lācis 'bear'	 	lāči
 	 	dz > dž	 	slēdzis 'switch'	 	slēdži
The following consonant clusters also alternate, for example:

 	 	 	 	Nominative singular	 	Nominative plural
 	 	sn > šņ	 	slieksnis 'threshold'	 	sliekšņi
 	 	zn > žņ	 	lauznis 'crow-bar'	 	laužņi
 	 	sl > šļ	 	kāpslis 'stirrup'	 	kāpšļi
 	 	zl > žļ	 	zizlis 'wand'	 	zižļi
 	 	ln > ļņ	 	alnis 'moose'	 	aļņi
 	 	ll > ļļ	 	zellis 'fellow'	 	zeļļi
If the stems end with labials b, p, m, v, there is no sound alteration, and the -j- of the ending is retained. For example:

 	 	Nominative singular	 	Nominative plural
 	 	burvis 'sorcerer'	 	burvji
 	 	gulbis 'svan'	 	gulbji
 	 	ūpis 'eagle owl'	 	ūpji
 	 	rāmis 'frame'	 	rāmji
If the stems end with ķ, ģ or r, then there is no sound alteration and the -j- of the ending is dropped. For example:

 	 	Nominative singular	 	Nominative plural
 	 	kaķis 'cat'	 	kaķi
 	 	kuģis 'ship'	 	kuģi
 	 	mūris 'wall'	 	mūri
In Modern Written Latvian, the sound alteration r > ŗ has been dropped. (See section 1.3). However, in older texts, linguistic texts and in texts published by Latvians living abroad this sound alteration is marked. For example:

 	 	Nominative singular	 	Nominative plural
 	 	teātris 'theater'	 	teātŗi
 	 	rokturis 'handle'	 	roktuŗi
From a historical perspective, second declension nouns seem to form a subgroup of the first declension. Note that nouns that have retained -ja- in all cases, for example vējš<*vējas 'wind' have been grouped into the 1st declension a-stems. (See section 3.1).

Paradigm for the second declension nouns brālis 'brother', cirvis 'axe':

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	brālis, cirvis	 	brāļi, cirvji
Gen.	 	brāļa, cirvja	 	brāļu, cirvju
Dat.	 	brālim, cirvim	 	brāļiem, cirvjiem
Acc.	 	brāli, cirvi	 	brāļus, cirvjus
Loc.	 	brālī, cirvī	 	brāļos, cirvjos
7.1.1 The Consonant Stem

There are seven masculine nouns that belong to the consonant stem: akmens 'rock', asmens 'blade', rudens 'autumn', ūdens 'water', zibens 'lightning', mēness 'moon', sāls 'salt'. The noun sāls has a parallel feminine form, and can be inflected according to the class VI declension. The consonant stem is usually grouped under the second declension.

The genitive singular is identical to the nominative singular for the nouns of this class. The rest of the paradigm is identical to the -ija-stem declension. Paradigm for the consonant stem nouns ūdens 'water', mēness 'moon':

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	ūdens, mēness	 	ūdeņi, mēneši
Gen.	 	ūdens, mēness	 	ūdeņu, mēnešu
Dat.	 	ūdenim, mēnesim	 	ūdeņiem, mēnešiem
Acc.	 	ūdeni, mēnesi	 	ūdeņus, mēnešus
Loc.	 	ūdenī, mēnesī	 	ūdeņos, mēnešos
7.1.2 Irregularities

Some nouns of the 2nd declension are irregular and are declined according to combinations of a-stem, ija-stem and consonant stem paradigms.

A. The noun suns 'dog' is declined according to the brālis paradigm, except that the nominative singular is written suns.

B. The nouns viesis 'guest' and tētis 'father' are declined in all plural forms and in the genitive singular as a-stem nouns, but in the remaining cases of the singular as ija-stem nouns. For example:

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	viesis	 	viesi
Gen.	 	viesa	 	viesu
Dat.	 	viesim	 	viesiem
Acc.	 	viesi	 	viesus
Loc.	 	viesī	 	viesos
C. Surnames ending in -skis and -ckis as well as first names ending in -tis and -dis are not palatalized. For example, the man's name Valdis Janševskis:

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	Valdis Janševskis	 	Valdi Janševski
Gen.	 	Valda Janševska	 	Valdu Janševsku
Dat.	 	Valdim Janševskim	 	Valdiem Janševskiem
Acc.	 	Valdi Janševski	 	Valdus Janševskus
Loc.	 	Valdī Janševskī	 	Valdos Janševskos
However, in compound names this rule is not observed, for example: Visvaldis (Nom. Sg.), Visvalža (Gen. Sg.).

D. Nouns ending with -astis, -jis, -matis, -skatis are not palatalized. For example:

 	 	Nom. Sg.	 	Gen. Sg.
 	 	strupastis 'bobtail'	 	strupasta
 	 	simtkājis 'centipede'	 	simtkāja
 	 	gaišmatis 'fair man'	 	gaišmata
 	 	tālskatis 'binoculars'	 	tālskata
7.2 Third Declension
Masculine nouns that have the ending -us in the nominative singular belong to the third declension. The nouns of this class are referred to as u-stems. Only a few nouns belong to the third declension: alus 'beer', apvidus 'region', dienvidus 'noon', klepus 'cough', ledus 'ice', lietus 'rain', medus 'honey', tirgus 'market', vidus 'middle, center', viltus 'deceit' and some proper names.

This is a closed declension and no new nouns are added to this class. The u-stem nouns have shown the tendency to migrate into the first declension. Today, for example the forms *krogus 'tavern', *cirkus 'circus', *kāsus 'dry cough' have been replaced by krogs, cirks, kāss.

The nominative and genitive singular of the u-stem nouns are identical. Though these nouns mainly appear in the singular, the plural is possible, and they are declined like the a-stems. Some of the plural forms also differ in meaning compared to the singular, for example, dienvidus 'noon', dienvidi 'south'. Paradigm of third declension noun tirgus 'market':

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	tirgus	 	tirgi
Gen.	 	tirgus	 	tirgu
Dat.	 	tirgum	 	tirgiem
Acc.	 	tirgu	 	tirgus
Loc.	 	tirgū	 	tirgos
7.3 Fifth Declension
The second largest group of feminine nouns belong to the fifth declension. They end with -e- in the nominative singular and are referred to as ē-stems, since in older forms the root ended with ē, for example Nom. Sg. egle < *eglē 'spruce'. In the genitive plural there is a palatization of the consonant in front of the ending, according to the sound alteration pattern shown in section 7.1 above.

The fifth declension is an open class where new nouns can be formed, for example: izvēlne '(computer) menu', blakne '(drug) side effect'.

A few nouns of the fifth declension refer to male persons, and they are declined like the feminine nouns of the 5th declension except for the dative singular, which has -em as ending instead of -ei. See example below. The same applies to male last names ending in -e, for example: Kārlis Zāle (Nom. Sg. Masc.), Kārlim Zālem (Dat. Sg. Masc.).

Paradigm for fifth declension nouns māte 'mother' (Fem.) and bende 'executioner' (Masc):

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	māte, bende	 	mātes, bendes
Gen.	 	mātes, bendes	 	māšu, benžu
Dat.	 	mātei, bendem	 	mātēm, bendēm
Acc.	 	māti, bendi	 	mātes, bendes
Loc.	 	mātē, bendē	 	mātēs, bendēs
7.4 Sixth Declension
Feminine nouns ending with -s in the nominative singular and in the genitive singular belong to the 6th declension. The nouns of this class are referred to as i-stems. In older forms, the nominative singular was *-is. For example: nominative sg *klētis 'granary'.

This is a closed, non-productive class containing less than fifty nouns. Many of the nouns refer to the body, for example: asins 'blood', acs 'eye', auss 'ear', balss 'voice', krūts 'breast', maksts 'vagina', nāss 'nostril', vāts 'wound', žults 'gall, bile'. Other commonly used words in this class are nakts 'night', uguns 'fire', pils 'castle', krāsns 'stove', telts 'tent'.

Place names ending in -pils belong to this declension too, for example the cities Daugavpils, Jēkabpils.

There is a palatization of the consonant in the genitive plural, according to the sound alteration pattern in section 7.1 above. For example: genitive plural klēšu >*klētju 'of the granaries'. Paradigm of sixth declension noun klēts 'granary':

Case	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	klēts	 	klētis
Gen.	 	klēts	 	klēšu
Dat.	 	klētij	 	klētīm
Acc.	 	klēti	 	klētis
Loc.	 	klētī	 	klētīs
The present dative plural ending -īm has arisen in harmony with the ā-stems and ē-stems, for example avs 'ewe' (Nom. Sg.), avīm (Dat. Pl.), in comparison to ievām 'bird-cherry tree' (Dat. Pl.), upēm 'river' (Dat. Pl.). The older dative plural ending with a short i is still heard in some dialects, for example *klētim 'to the granaries', *acims 'to the eyes'.

7.4.1 Irregularities

Historically, the sixth declension can be regarded as being a mix of i-stem nouns and consonant stem nouns. This explains why several nouns of the sixth declension do not have palatization in the genitive plural. For example:

 	 	Nominative Singular	 	Genitive Plural
 	 	auss 'ear'	 	ausu
 	 	ass 'axle'	 	asu
 	 	acs 'eye'	 	acu
 	 	balss 'voice'	 	balsu
 	 	debess 'sky'	 	debesu
 	 	dzelzs 'iron'	 	dzelzu
 	 	uts 'louse'	 	utu
 	 	zoss 'goose'	 	zosu
This is also true for the plural nouns brokastis 'breakfast' and Cēsis (the name of a town in Latvia), with their respective genitive forms brokastu, Cēsu.

This declension also has two pluralia tantum: durvis 'door' and the only masculine noun in this class ļaudis 'people'. The paradigms are as follows:

Case	 	Feminine Plural	 	Masculine Plural
Nom.	 	durvis	 	ļaudis
Gen.	 	durvju	 	ļaužu
Dat.	 	durvīm	 	ļaudīm
Acc.	 	durvis	 	ļaudis
Loc.	 	durvīs	 	ļaudīs
There is a tendency for i-stem nouns to migrate to the ē-stems of the fifth declension, for example azote < *azots 'bosom'.

8 Verb Tenses
8.1 The Simple Past Tense
In all conjugations the simple past (or preterite) is formed by adding the following endings to the past stem:

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
1st	 	-u	 	-ām
2nd	 	-i	 	-āt
3rd	 	-a	 	-a
These are identical to the Subset C endings of the present as referred to in section 4.3.

The ending -u of the first person singular in the past tense has been shortened from the older -au, for example: 'I placed' liku < *likau.

The ending -i of the second person singular in the past tense has been shortened from the older -ai, or in some cases from the older -ei, for example, vilki < *vilkai 'you (sg) pulled'; vedi < *vedei 'you (sg) lead'.

Two types of preterite forms, the ā-preterite and the ē-preterite, are found in older East Baltic (i.e. Latvian and Lithuanian) primary verbs. In present-day Latvian the ē-preterite is found only in some dialects and in older texts, for example, vedēm 'we lead', vedēt 'you (pl) lead'. In Standard Written Latvian, both preterite forms have merged into the ā-preterite. In Lithuanian, both preterite forms have survived.

8.1.1 Simple Past Tense Class I (Short Conjugation)

Example of the simple past tense of first subclass verbs: infinitive: augt 'to grow'

1 Sg.	 	augu
2 Sg.	 	augi
3 Sg.	 	auga
1 Pl.	 	augām
2 Pl.	 	augāt
3 Pl.	 	auga
As a relic of the older ē-preterite, a vowel alternation occurs in verbs with -e as the stem vowel, for example, cept 'to bake', degt 'to burn', ēst 'to eat', mest 'to throw', nest 'to carry', vest 'to lead'. Whereas all forms in the present, except for the second person singular are pronounced with an "open e", all forms in the past are pronounced with a "closed e". The infinitive is pronounced with a "closed e". (See section 1.1).

Example of the simple past tense of second subclass verbs: infinitive: likt 'to put'

1 Sg.	 	liku
2 Sg.	 	liki
3 Sg.	 	lika
1 Pl.	 	likām
2 Pl.	 	likāt
3 Pl.	 	lika
Examples of the simple past tense of third subclass verbs: infinitives: zagt 'to steal', prast 'to know', skriet 'to run'

1 Sg.	 	zagu	 	pratu	 	skrēju
2 Sg.	 	zagi	 	prati	 	skrēji
3 Sg.	 	zaga	 	prata	 	skrēja
1 Pl.	 	zagām	 	pratām	 	skrējām
2 Pl.	 	augāt	 	pratāt	 	skrējāt
3 Pl.	 	zaga	 	prata	 	skrēja
Examples of the simple past tense of fourth subclass verbs: infinitives: kāpt 'to climb', pļaut 'to reap'

1 Sg.	 	kāpu	 	pļāvu
2 Sg.	 	kāpi	 	pļāvi
3 Sg.	 	kāpa	 	pļāva
1 Pl.	 	kāpām	 	pļāvām
2 Pl.	 	kāpāt	 	pļāvāt
3 Pl.	 	kāpa	 	pļāva
Example of the simple past tense of fifth subclass verbs infinitive: kļūt 'to become'

1 Sg.	 	kļuvu
2 Sg.	 	kļuvi
3 Sg.	 	kļuva
1 Pl.	 	kļuvām
2 Pl.	 	kļuvāt
3 Pl.	 	kļuva
8.1.2 Simple Past Tense Class II (Long Conjugation)

In class II verbs, the first person singular in the past is indentical to the first person singular in the present. Verbs of this class can be classified according to the -āj-, -oj-, -ēj-, and -ij- stems.

Examples of class II verbs in the simple past: infinitives: runāt 'to speak', gatavot 'to prepare', audzēt 'to grow', svētīt 'to bless'

1 Sg.	 	runāju	 	gatavoju	 	audzēju	 	svētīju
2 Sg.	 	runāji	 	gatavoji	 	audzēji	 	svētīji
3 Sg.	 	runāja	 	gatavoja	 	audzēja	 	svētīja
1 Pl.	 	runājām	 	gatavojām	 	audzējām	 	svētījām
2 Pl.	 	runājāt	 	gatavojāt	 	audzējāt	 	svētījāt
3 Pl.	 	runāja	 	gatavoja	 	audzēja	 	svētīja
There is only one verb with a -uj- stem that belongs to this class: infinitive: dabūt 'to get'

1 Sg.	 	dabūju
2 Sg.	 	dabūji
3 Sg.	 	dabūja
1 Pl.	 	dabūjām
2 Pl.	 	dabūjāt
3 Pl.	 	dabūja
8.1.3 Simple Past Tense Class III (mixed conjugation)

Examples of the simple past tense of class III verbs: infinitives: turēt 'to hold', dalīt 'to divide', audzināt 'to foster'

1 Sg.	 	turēju	 	dalīju	 	audzināju
2 Sg.	 	turēji	 	dalīji	 	audzināji
3 Sg.	 	turēja	 	dalīja	 	audzināja
1 Pl.	 	turējām	 	dalījām	 	audzinājām
2 Pl.	 	turējāt	 	dalījāt	 	audzinājāt
3 Pl.	 	turēja	 	dalīja	 	audzināja
8.2 The Simple Future Tense
In all conjugations, the future tense is formed by adding the following endings to the infinitive stem:

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
1st	 	-šu	 	-sim
2nd	 	-si	 	-si(e)t
3rd	 	-s	 	-s
Historically, the future endings were formed from expanding the infinitive root with the suffix -si and then adding the personal endings, for example, do-šu < *do-si-u 'I will give', do-si < *do-s(i)-i 'you will give'.

In the second person plural, two parallel forms, ending with -it or -iet, are accepted: for example, dosit or dosiet 'you (pl) will give'. The -iet ending is generally regarded as colloquial style.

Examples of the future tense of class I, II and III verbs: infinitives: augt 'to grow', audzēt 'to cultivate', audzināt 'to foster'

1 Sg.	 	augšu	 	audzēšu	 	audzināšu
2 Sg.	 	augsi	 	audzēsi	 	audzināsi
3 Sg.	 	augs	 	audzēs	 	audzinās
1 Pl.	 	augsim	 	audzēsim	 	audzināsim
2 Pl.	 	augsi(e)t	 	audzēsi(e)t	 	audzināsi(e)t
3 Pl.	 	augs	 	audzēs	 	audzinās
All verbs ending in -st and -zt in the infinitive, form the future tense from the past stem by inserting an -ī- before the future endings, for example: infinitives: ēst 'to eat', lūzt 'to break'

1 Sg.	 	ēdīšu	 	lūzīšu
2 Sg.	 	ēdīsi	 	lūzīsi
3 Sg.	 	ēdīs	 	lūzīs
1 Pl.	 	ēdīsim	 	lūzīsim
2 Pl.	 	ēdīsi(e)t	 	lūzīsi(e)t
3 Pl.	 	ēdīs	 	lūzīs
8.3 Conjugation of Irregular Verbs būt, iet, dot
The irregular verbs 'to be' būt, 'to go' iet and 'to give' dot are former Indo-European athematical verbs (where endings are attached directly to the stem) and where certain older forms have been retained up to the present. For example, es-mu < *es-mi 'I am', es-i < *es-si 'you (sg) are'; the dialectal forms of ej-u 'I go': ie-mu or ei-mu < *ei-mi; ie-t < *ei-ti 'he, she, they go'; dialectal form of do-mu < *do(d)-mi (standard form do-du) 'I give': infinitives: būt 'to be', iet 'to go', dot 'to give'

Present	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	esmu	 	eju	 	dodu
2 Sg.	 	esi	 	ej	 	dod
3 Sg.	 	ir	 	iet	 	dod
1 Pl.	 	esam	 	ejam	 	dodam
2 Pl.	 	esat	 	ejat	 	dodat
3 Pl.	 	ir	 	iet	 	dod
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Simple Past	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	biju	 	gāju	 	devu
2 Sg.	 	biji	 	gāji	 	devi
3 Sg.	 	bija	 	gāja	 	deva
1 Pl.	 	bijām	 	gājām	 	devām
2 Pl.	 	bijāt	 	gājāt	 	devāt
3 Pl.	 	bija	 	gāja	 	deva
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Simple Future	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	būšu	 	iešu	 	došu
2 Sg.	 	būsi	 	iesi	 	dosi
3 Sg.	 	būs	 	ies	 	dos
1 Pl.	 	būsim	 	iesim	 	dosim
2 Pl.	 	būsi(e)t	 	iesi(e)t	 	dosi(e)t
3 Pl.	 	būs	 	ies	 	dos
9 Pronouns
9.1 Personal Pronouns
The use of personal pronouns is similar to that in English. The personal pronouns in Latvian are as follows:

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
 	 	es 'I'	 	mēs 'we'
 	 	tu 'you (sg)'	 	jūs 'you (pl)'
 	 	viņš 'he'	 	viņi 'they (masc.)'
 	 	viņa 'she'	 	viņas 'they (fem.)'
As in most European languages, the plural form of 'you' Jūs is used in polite address, tu 'you (sg)' is used to address children or close friends. Personal pronouns are declined as follows:

Singular	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom.	 	es	 	tu	 	viņš	 	viņa
Gen.	 	manis	 	tevis	 	viņa	 	viņas
Dat.	 	man	 	tev	 	viņam	 	viņai
Acc.	 	mani	 	tevi	 	viņu	 	viņu
Loc.	 	manī	 	tevī	 	viņā	 	viņā
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Plural	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nom.	 	mēs	 	jūs	 	viņi	 	viņas
Gen.	 	mūsu	 	jūsu	 	viņu	 	viņu
Dat.	 	mums	 	jums	 	viņiem	 	viņām
Acc.	 	mūs	 	jūs	 	viņus	 	viņas
Loc.	 	mūsos	 	jūsos	 	viņos	 	viņās
The forms viņš, viņa are actually archaic demonstrative pronouns, for example: viņa kalna galiņā 'that mountain top (loc)'. Today viņš, viņa are used as third person pronouns. The archaic third person *jis, however, is still currently used in Lithuanian and in some eastern dialects of Latvia.

9.2 Possessive Pronouns
The possessive pronouns for the first and second persons singular are:

Singular	 	Masc.	 	Fem.	 	Gloss
1st	 	mans	 	mana	 	'my, mine'
2nd	 	tavs	 	tava	 	'your, yours'
The possessive pronoun savs (masc.), sava (fem.) 'one's own', refers to the subject. For example: Viņš redz savu atspīdumu 'He sees his own reflection'.

The possesive pronouns change in gender according to the thing possessed and agree with the nouns they qualify in number and case. They are declined according to the a-stem paradigm in the masculine and the ā-stem paradigm in the feminine: mans tēvs 'my father', tava māte 'your (sg.) mother', mani brāļi 'my brothers', tavas māsas 'your (sg.) sisters'.

The possessive pronoun for the third person singular is viņa 'his', viņas 'hers'. This is actually the genitive of the personal pronouns viņš, viņa, and are therefore indeclinable: viņas tēvs 'her father', viņas māte 'her mother', viņas brāļi 'her brothers'.

In the first, second, and third person plural, the possessive pronouns are the genitive of personal pronouns mēs 'we', jūs 'you (pl)',viņi 'they (masc.)', viņas 'they (fem.)' and are therefore indeclinable: mūsu 'our, ours', jūsu 'your, yours (pl)', viņu 'their, theirs (masc. and fem.)'.

9.3 Reflexive Pronouns
The reflexive personal pronoun sev- has the following forms:

Nom.	 	--
Gen.	 	sevis
Dat.	 	sev
Acc.	 	sevi
Loc.	 	sevī
It has no nominative, and therefore can never be the subject. It can only refer to the subject. The reflexive personal pronoun can be used in all persons and in both the singular and plural, for example:

Viņi sev raksta. 'They write to themselves.'
Es ieeju sevī. 'I am going into myself.' (figuratively)
9.4 The Pronoun pats
The pronoun pats 'himself', pati 'herself' is used in Latvian for emphasis. For example:

Es to salaboju. 'I fixed it.'
Es pats to salaboju. 'I fixed it myself.'
mana māja 'my house'
mana paša māja 'my very own house'
Apart from the nominative singular, all other forms of pats are derived from the stem paš-:

Case	 	Masc. Sg.	 	Fem. Sg.	 	Masc. Pl.	 	Fem. Pl.
Nom.	 	pats	 	pati	 	paši	 	pašas
Gen.	 	paša	 	pašas	 	pašu	 	pašu
Dat.	 	pašam	 	pašai	 	pašiem	 	pašām
Acc.	 	pašu	 	pašu	 	pašus	 	pašas
Loc.	 	pašā	 	paša	 	pašos	 	pašās
10 Negation
There are only a few negative particles in Latvian, and negation is mainly expressed by the negative particle ne, which is placed in front of or joined to the word to be negated. For example: viņa runā 'she speaks', viņa nerunā 'she doesn't speak'.

The negation of būt 'to be' is regular, except for the negation of ir 'he, she, they are', which is nav:

Es neesmu skolotāja 'I am not a teacher'.
Mēs nebūsim birojā 'We will not be in the office'.
Viņš nav gudrs 'He is not smart'.
The double negation ne ... ne is translated by 'neither ... nor'. For example: Tu neesi ne Parīzē ne Berlīnē 'You are neither in Paris nor in Berlin.'

'No, not' is expressed by the particle nē, in contrast with the positive particle jā 'yes'.

With the negative pronouns, for example nekas 'nothing, not anything', nekāds 'no, none', nekatrs 'not everyone', nekurš 'not anyone', or with any other negative form, the negation is repeated with the verb or adverb and the negative statement is retained. For example:

Es nekur neiešu 'I will go nowhere'.
Nekādā gadījumā to nedrīkst pieļaut 'In no way should that be allowed'.

Lesson 10: Latvian
Lilita Zalkalns, Peteris Vanags, and Jonathan Slocum
The initiator and translator of the first Latvian Bible, Johann Ernst Glück (1654-1705), was born in Wettin, Saxony. He went to Latin school in Altenburg, Thüringen, and later studied theology at Wittenberg University. From the age of 21 he spent some years in Livonia, learning Latvian and Estonian.

Glück then returned to Germany to improve his knowledge of Hebrew and Old Greek at Leipzig University under the tutelage of Esdras Edzardus (1629-1708), a renowned orientalist. In 1680 he was appointed minister of the Swedish regiment at Dünamünde, near Riga. He married Christina Emerentia von Reuter, daughter of a Baltic-German army officer. In 1682 Glück was appointed pastor of the large Aluksne parish, which extended from the river Daugava in the south to the town of Aluksne to the north-east. Here he completed the translation of the Bible into Latvian and began to translate the Bible into Russian.

In the 1690s Martha Skavronska (1685-1727), a peasant child of unknown parentage, was taken in by the Glücks to help look after the six Glück children. When Aluksne was occupied by the Russian army in 1702, the Glück family and Martha Skavronska were taken as prisoners to Moscow. As well-born prisoners, the Glücks were treated well by the Russians. Glück was appointed head of a newly established Latin gymnasium, and for a year he was also the private tutor of the Tsarevitch. Martha Skavronska, due to her beauty, pleasant nature and wit, became the mistress of Tsar Peter I and after their marriage was crowned as Catherine I.

Throughout his life, Ernst Glück was tireless in his work of explaining the word of God and educating the masses. He believed in following the letter and intent of the law of the land, and therefore was often involved in disputes with colleagues and superiors. In 1683, he established the first three schools in the Livonian countryside for children of peasants. Previously, there had been only four schools in the larger towns for children of the aristrocracy.

Glück, either alone or with assistants, translated the following into Latvian: the Book of Worship (1690), the Little Catechism (1699, frequently reprinted until 1818), the Latvian Prayer Book (compiled 1686) and the complete Bible (1685-1694).

As a prisoner in Moscow, he continued to translate the Bible into Russian -- though, unfortunately, this manuscript has been lost. He founded a weekly Russian newspaper and translated works of classical authors and books about navigation, the art of war and history. He also wrote poetry in Russian.

Ernst Glück died in Moscow in 1705. Due to Martha Skavronska's connections and care, Glück's widow and children were well provided for. Christina Emerentia Glück was bequeathed two country estate holdings in present-day Estonia, where she died in 1745, having survived her husband by 40 years.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The translation of the Latvian Bible by pastor Johann Ernst Glück and his helpers was one of the most important events at the end of the 17th century. This work, totalling over 2500 pages, was the most extensive printed work in the Latvian language for several centuries.

The New Testament was published in 1685, the Old Testament in 1689 and the Apocrypha in 1692. The distribution of the Bible began in 1694 and was actively supported by the King Charles XI of Sweden, who ordered that a part of the total of 1,500 printed Bibles were to be distributed to parish churches and schools without cost. The Glück Bible became the basic reader and work of reference for the Latvian peasantry until well into the 19th century. Thus the orthography and language of the Bible, which was based on the Central dialect, also became the basis of Modern Standard Latvian.

The Bible was published in the Gothic (fraktur) script, a tradition that continued in printed Latvian well into the 20th century. Handwritten texts, however, were written in Latin letters.

Johann Ernst Glück admitted that his Latvian translations of the Bible and other religious texts were important improvements over earlier translations carried out by other clergymen. However, he was not able to reform the German language-based writing traditions that were in use at the time, nor could he significantly erase the heavy traces of German syntax and concepts from his Latvian translations. A very obvious example of German language influence is the use of the Latvian demonstrative pronoun tas 'that' to translate the German definite article der.

The orthographic rules of this period can be generalized as follows:

doubled consonants indicate that the previous vowel is short;
nouns are capitalized;
differentiation is made between the conjunction ir 'and' and verb irr 'is';
a topped by a circumflex = locative ending ā;
e topped by a circumflex = locative ending ē;
ee = ie;
h = a silent letter to indicate the lengthening of the previous vowel in word roots and in some endings;
crossed-over k = ķ;
crossed-over n = ņ;
s = z in word initial and middle position;
long crossed-over s in the beginning or middle of a word = s;
long crossed-over s + ch = š;
s + ch = ž;
z = c;
w = v.
The orthographic representation of the text presented below -- chapter 2 of the Gospel according to Matthew -- has been transcribed from the Gothic script and partly modernized. A transcription which fully follows the original spelling can be studied at http://www.ailab.lv/SENIE/static/Mt.html. The base forms of the words below, enclosed by < >, are given in Modern Standard Latvian.

1 - Un kad Jesus dsimmis bij Betlemē eeksch Juddo Semmes, tha Ķehniņa Erodus Laikā, redsi, tad nahze Gudree no Austruma Semmes us Jerusalemi, un sazzija:
 Collapse All
Un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
kad -- adverb; <kad> when -- when
Jesus -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Jēzus> Jesus -- Jesus
dsimmis -- verb; nominative singular masculine past active participle of <dzimt, dzimstu, dzimu> to be born -- been born
bij -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- had
Betlemē -- proper noun, feminine; locative singular of <Bethlehem> Bethlehem -- in Bethlehem
eeksch -- adverb; <iekš> in -- in
Juddo -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <jūds> Jew -- of the Jews
Semmes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <zeme> land, country -- land
tha -- demonstrative pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Ķehniņa -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <ķēniņš> king -- of king
Erodus -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Herods> Herod -- Herod
Laikā -- noun, masculine; locative singular of <laiks> time -- in the days
redsi -- verb; 2nd person singular imperfect of <redzēt, redzu, redzēju> to see -- behold
tad -- adverb; <tad> then, after that -- then
nahze -- verb; 3rd person plural preterit of <nākt, nāku, nācu> to come -- came
Gudree -- definite adjective; nominative plural masculine of <gudrais> wise man -- wise men
no -- preposition; <no> from -- from
Austruma -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <austrums> east -- the east
Semmes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <zeme> land, country -- ...
us -- preposition; <uz> on, upon -- to
Jerusalemi -- proper noun, feminine; accusative singular of <Jeruzāleme> Jerusalem -- Jerusalem
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
sazzija -- verb; 3rd person preterit of <sacīt, saku, sacīju> to say -- said

2 - Kur irr tas peedsimmis Ķehniņsch tho Juddo? jo mehs essam viņņa Swaigsni redsejschi Austruma Semmē, un nahkuschi to peeluhgt.
 Collapse All
Kur -- adverb; <kur> where -- where
irr -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- is
tas -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- he
peedsimmis -- verb; nominative singular masculine past active participle of <piedzimt, piedzimstu, piedzimu> to be born -- who is born
Ķehniņsch -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <ķēniņš> king -- king
tho -- demonstrative pronoun; genitive plural masculine of <tas, tā> that -- of the
Juddo -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <jūds> Jew -- Jews
jo -- adverb; <jo> because -- for
mehs -- pronoun; nominative plural of <es> I -- we
essam -- verb; 1st person plural present of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- have
viņņa -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <viņš> he -- his
Swaigsni -- noun, feminine; accusative singular of <zvaigzne> star -- star
redsejschi -- verb; nominative plural masculine past active participle of <redzēt, redzu, redzēju> to see -- seen
Austruma -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <austrums> east -- in the eastern
Semmē -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <zeme> land, country -- land
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
nahkuschi -- verb; nominative plural masculine past active participle of <nākt, nāku, nācu> to come -- have come
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- him
peeluhgt -- verb; infinitive of <pielūgt, pielūdzu, pielūdzu> to worship -- to worship

3 - Kad tas Ķehniņsch Erodus to dsirdeja, issabijajahs viņsch, un vissa Jerusaleme ar viņņa.
 Collapse All
Kad -- adverb; <kad> when -- when
tas -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- ...
Ķehniņsch -- noun, masculine; nominative singular of <ķēniņš> king -- king
Erodus -- proper noun, masculine; nominative singular of <Herods> Herod -- Herod
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- it
dsirdeja -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <dzirdēt, dzirdu, dzirdēju> to hear -- heard
issabijajahs -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <izsabijāties, izsabijājos, izsabijājos> to be frightened -- was troubled
viņsch -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
vissa -- adjective; nominative singular feminine of <viss> all -- all
Jerusaleme -- proper noun, feminine; nominative singular of <Jeruzāleme> Jerusalem -- Jerusalem
ar -- preposition; <ar> with, together, and -- with
viņņa -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <viņš> he -- him

4 - Un saaizinajs vissus Augstus Preesteŗus un Raksta Mahzitajus starp teem Ļaudim isklausija viņsch no teem: Kur Kristum bij dsimt?
 Collapse All
Un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
saaizinajs -- verb; nominative singular masculine past active participle of <saaicināt, saaicinu, saaicināju> to invite -- having gathered
vissus -- adjective; accusative plural masculine of <viss> all -- all
Augstus -- adjective; accusative plural masculine of <augsts> high, chief -- chief
Preesteŗus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <priesteris> priest -- priests
un -- conjunction; <un> and -- and
Raksta -- noun, masculine; genitive singular of <raksts> text, writing -- ...
Mahzitajus -- noun, masculine; accusative plural of <mācītājs> pastor -- scribes
starp -- adverb; <starp> between, among -- of
teem -- demonstrative pronoun; dative plural masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Ļaudim -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <ļaudis> people -- people
isklausija -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <izklausīt, izklausu, izklausīju> to inquire, ask -- asked
viņsch -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <viņš> he -- he
no -- preposition; <no> from -- ...
teem -- demonstrative pronoun; dative plural masculine of <tas, tā> that -- them
Kur -- adverb; <kur> where -- where
Kristum -- proper noun, masculine; dative singular of <Kristus> Christ -- the Christ
bij -- verb; 3rd person singular preterit of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- had
dsimt -- verb; infinitive of <dzimt, dzimstu, dzimu> to be born -- been born

5 - Un tee sazzija tam: Betlemē eeksch Juddo Semmes; Jo tā irr rakstihts zaur to Praveetu:
 Collapse All
Un -- conjunction; <un> and -- ...
tee -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative plural masculine of <tas, tā> that -- they
sazzija -- verb; 3rd person past of <sacīt, saku, sacīju> to say -- said
tam -- demonstrative pronoun; dative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- to him
Betlemē -- proper noun, feminine; locative singular of <Bethlehem> Bethlehem -- in Bethlehem
eeksch -- adverb; <iekš> in -- in
Juddo -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <jūds> Jew -- of the Jews
Semmes -- noun, feminine; genitive singular of <zeme> land, country -- the land
Jo -- adverb; <jo> because -- for
tā -- adverb; <tā> so, thus -- thus
irr -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- it is
rakstihts -- verb; nominative singular masculine past passive participle of <rakstīt, rakstu, rakstīju> to write -- written
zaur -- adverb; <caur> through -- through
to -- demonstrative pronoun; accusative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Praveetu -- noun, masculine; accusative singular of <pravietis> prophet -- prophet

6 - Un tu Betleme Juddo Semmē, tu ne kā essi ta Masaka starp teem Leeleem Kungeem no Juda: Jo no tewim buhs man nahkt tam Valdneekam, kas pahr manneem Ļaudim Israeļa valdihs.
 Collapse All
Un -- conjunction; <un> and -- ...
tu -- pronoun; nominative singular of <tu> you -- you
Betleme -- proper noun, feminine; nominative singular of <Bethlehem> Bethlehem -- Bethlehem
Juddo -- noun, masculine; genitive plural of <jūds> Jew -- of the Jews
Semmē -- noun, feminine; locative singular of <zeme> land, country -- land
tu -- pronoun; nominative singular of <tu> you -- you
ne -- negative particle; <ne> not -- not
kā -- pronoun; genitive singular masculine of <kas> which -- ...
essi -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- are
ta -- demonstrative pronoun; nominative singular feminine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Masaka -- comparative definite adjective; nominative singular feminine of <maza> little -- least
starp -- adverb; <starp> between, among -- among
teem -- demonstrative pronoun; dative plural masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Leeleem -- adjective; dative plural masculine of <liels> big -- ...
Kungeem -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <kungs> lord, master -- princes
no -- preposition; <no> from -- of
Juda -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Jūds> Judah -- Judah
Jo -- adverb; <jo> because -- for
no -- preposition; <no> from -- out of
tewim -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <tu> you -- you
buhs -- verb; 3rd person singular future of <būt, esmu, biju> to be -- shall
man -- pronoun; dative singular masculine of <es> I -- ...
nahkt -- verb; infinitive of <nākt, nāku, nācu> to come -- come
tam -- demonstrative pronoun; dative singular masculine of <tas, tā> that -- the
Valdneekam -- noun, masculine; dative singular of <valdnieks> governor, leader -- governor
kas -- pronoun; nominative singular masculine of <kas> that -- who
pahr -- adverb; <pār> over -- over
manneem -- pronoun; dative plural masculine of <mans> my -- my
Ļaudim -- noun, masculine; dative plural of <ļaudis> people -- people
Israeļa -- proper noun, masculine; genitive singular of <Israēlis> Israel -- Israel
valdihs -- verb; 3rd person singular future of <valdīt, valdu, valdīju> to lead, rule -- shall rule

Lesson Text
1 - Un kad Jesus dsimmis bij Betlemē eeksch Juddo Semmes, tha Ķehniņa Erodus Laikā, redsi, tad nahze Gudree no Austruma Semmes us Jerusalemi, un sazzija: 2 - Kur irr tas peedsimmis Ķehniņsch tho Juddo? jo mehs essam viņņa Swaigsni redsejschi Austruma Semmē, un nahkuschi to peeluhgt. 3 - Kad tas Ķehniņsch Erodus to dsirdeja, issabijajahs viņsch, un vissa Jerusaleme ar viņņa. 4 - Un saaizinajs vissus Augstus Preesteŗus un Raksta Mahzitajus starp teem Ļaudim isklausija viņsch no teem: Kur Kristum bij dsimt? 5 - Un tee sazzija tam: Betlemē eeksch Juddo Semmes; Jo tā irr rakstihts zaur to Praveetu: 6 - Un tu Betleme Juddo Semmē, tu ne kā essi ta Masaka starp teem Leeleem Kungeem no Juda: Jo no tewim buhs man nahkt tam Valdneekam, kas pahr manneem Ļaudim Israeļa valdihs.
Translation
Matthew 2:1-6 --
(1) And when Jesus had been born in Bethlehem in the land of the Jews in the days of King Herod, behold, wise men from the east then came to Jerusalem, and said, (2) "Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the eastern land, and have come to worship him." (3) When King Herod heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. (4) And having gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ had been born. (5) They said to him, "In Bethlehem the land of the Jews, for thus it is written through the prophet, (6) 'You Bethlehem, land of the Jews, you are not the least among the princes of Judah: for out of you shall come the governor, who shall rule over my people, Israel.'"
Grammar
11 Reflexives
The Indo-European medial voice (Latin: genus medium), as a voice existing between the active and the passive, has not been retained in the Baltic languages. In Latvian, the medial forms have been replaced by reflexive verbs that mainly express an action which is directed towards the subject or that express an action which is reciprocal.

The signifier -s of the reflexive form is a relic of the archaic enclitic pronoun *si (=sevi, sev), which, not being accented, has merged with its adherent verb.

The development of the form can be illustrated as follows. The first person singular in the active present (except ā-stems) and in the active future had the ending -uo. Over the course of time, the short ending vowels disappeared, and the long vowels and diphthongs were shortened. Thus, the uo shortened to u in the first person singular. In the reflexive, however, the uo was retained, since it was no longer the last syllable, after that the *si-form had been added. At the same time, the sj changed into š. Example of the verb mazgāt 'to wash'; mazgāties 'to wash oneself':

 	 	1st Sg. Present	 	1st Sg. Future
Active	 	*mazgājuo > mazgāju	 	*mazgāsjuo > mazgāšu
Reflexive	 	*mazgājuo-si > mazgājuos	 	*mazgāsjuo-si > mazgāšuos
(The orthographic representation of the forms mazgājuos, mazgāšuos in Standard Written Latvian is mazgājos, mazgāšos.)

For the ā-stems, the older ending in the first person singular present and past in the active was -au, for example *zinau 'I know' (Lith. žinau), *darau 'I do' (Lith. darau), *grūdau 'I pushed' (Lith. grūdau). The old corresponding reflexive forms were *zinausi (Lith. žinausi), *darausi (Lith. darausi), *grūdausi (Lith. grūdausi). However, the forms in Latvian did not reduce to the expected *zinaus, *daraus, *grūdaus, but to the current zinos, daros, grūdos, probably in analogy to the other verb conjugations.

In prefixed verbs, the reflexive pronoun (-si-, or -s-, -sa-, -za-, -z-) was formerly inserted directly after the suffix. This form is still found in older folksongs and in some western and eastern Latvian dialects. For example: at-si-rada 'found oneself, was situated'; sa-sa-tiku 'I met (with someone)'.

In non-prefixed verbs, the reflexive pronoun was added to the end of the verb.

Some verbs are found only in the reflexive, for example: bīties 'to fear', kaunēties 'to be/feel ashamed', gadīties 'to happen', maldīties 'to get lost', brīnīties 'to wonder (at)'.

11.1 The Reflexive Infinitive
The reflexive infinitive is formed from the indicative active infinitive stem plus the reflexive ending -ties. For example: mācī-t 'to teach'; mācī-ties 'to learn'.

11.2 The Present Tense
The present tense in the reflexive is formed by adding subset 1 or subset 2 endings to the present stem. Subset 2 applies to all class III verbs (mixed conjugation) that in the indicative active end in -īt and -ināt, including zināt 'to know'. Subset 1 applies to all other verbs.

 	 	Subset 1
1 Sg.	 	-os
2 Sg.	 	-ies
3 Sg.	 	-as
1 Pl.	 	-amies
2 Pl.	 	-aties
3 Pl.	 	-as
 	 	 
 	 	Subset 2
1 Sg.	 	-os
2 Sg.	 	-ies
3 Sg.	 	-ās
1 Pl.	 	-āmies
2 Pl.	 	-āties
3 Pl.	 	-ās
Example of the present tense of reflexive verbs: Infinitives: glābties 'to save one's self, take refuge', dalīties 'partake, share'

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
1st	 	glābjos, dalos	 	glābjamies, dalāmies
2nd	 	glābies, dalies	 	glābjaties, dalāties
3rd	 	glābjas, dalās	 	glābjas, dalās
11.3 The Simple Past (Preterite) Tense
To form the simple past (preterite) tense in the reflexive, subset 2 endings are added to the past stem. This applies to verbs of all classes.

Example of the simple past tense of reflexive verbs: Infinitives: glābties 'to save one's self, take refuge', dalīties 'partake, share'

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
1st	 	glābos, dalījos	 	glābāmies, dalījāmies
2nd	 	glābies, dalījies	 	glābāties, dalījāties
3rd	 	glābās, dalījās	 	glābās, dalījās
11.4 The Simple Future Tense
To form the simple future tense in the reflexive, the following endings are added to the future stem. This applies to verbs of all classes.

1 Sg.	 	-šos
2 Sg.	 	-sies
3 Sg.	 	-sies
1 Pl.	 	-simies
2 Pl.	 	-si(e)ties
3 Pl.	 	-sies
Example of the simple future tense of reflexive verbs: Infinitives: glābties 'to save one's self, take refuge', dalīties 'partake, share'

 	 	Singular	 	Plural
1st	 	glābšos, dalīšos	 	glābsimies, dalīsimies
2nd	 	glābsies, dalīsies	 	glābsi(e)ties, dalīsi(e)ties
3rd	 	glābsies, dalīsies	 	glābsies, dalīsies
12 Pronouns
12.1 Demonstrative Pronouns
The basic demonstrative pronouns are:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
'this'	 	šis	 	šī
'that'	 	tas	 	tā
'this kind'	 	šāds	 	šāda
'that kind'	 	tāds	 	tāda
šis/šī, tas/tā are declined according to the paradigms below. Of the three parallel forms in the locative, the nethermost locatives šinī/tanī, šinīs/tanīs are used in colloquial style:

Singular	 	Masc.	 	Masc.	 	Fem.	 	Fem.
Nom.	 	šis	 	tas	 	šī	 	tā
Gen.	 	šī/šā	 	tā	 	šīs/šās	 	tās
Dat.	 	šim	 	tam	 	šai	 	tai
Acc.	 	šo	 	to	 	šo	 	to
Loc.	 	šajā	 	tajā	 	šajā	 	tajā
 	 	šai	 	tai	 	šai	 	tai
 	 	šinī	 	tanī	 	šinī	 	tanī
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Plural	 	Masc.	 	Masc.	 	Fem.	 	Fem.
Nom.	 	šie	 	tie	 	šīs/šās	 	tās
Gen.	 	šo	 	to	 	šo	 	to
Dat.	 	šiem	 	tiem	 	šīm	 	tām
Acc.	 	šos	 	tos	 	šīs/šās	 	tās
Loc.	 	šajos	 	tajos	 	šajās	 	tajā
 	 	šais	 	tais	 	šais	 	tais
 	 	šinīs	 	tanīs	 	šinīs	 	tanīs
The demonstrative pronouns šāds/šāda, tāds/tāda are declined according to the -a-stem paradigm for the masculine forms and accordig to the -ā-stem paradigm for the feminine forms.

Other demonstrative pronouns are:

 	 	Masculine	 	Feminine
'this here'	 	šitas	 	šitā
'this kind here'	 	šitāds	 	šitāda
These forms are compounds of šis + tas, tāds, and are used to direct special emphasis onto the nearest thing. In general, these forms are used in colloquial style. They are declined as tas/tā above.

In Latvian and Lithuanian, historical pronominal endings were taken over into the adjective declensions. In Latvian, the endings then migrated from the adjective declensions into the noun declensions. According to Endzelīns (1951), for example, the dative singular ending -am has been taken over from the pronominal declension.

In older texts and in certain dialects, the older dative plural forms *tiems, *šiems, *tāms, *šāms, *šīms have been retained.

12.2 The Anaphoric Pronoun
The demonstrative pronoun tas, tā is also used as an anaphoric pronoun of the third person, and corresponds to the English 'it' (sg.) and 'they' (pl.). For example: Māja ir maza 'The house is little', Tā ir maza 'It is little'.

12.3 The Interrogative, Relative and Indefinite Pronouns
Three so-called 'k-pronouns', all beginning with a k (Nau, 1998), can have an interrogative, relative or an indefinite function:

kas 'who, what, which, something, anything'
kurš/kura (formerly kuŗš/kuŗa) 'who, which' (fem., masc.)
kāds/kāda 'what kind (of), somebody, someone, anybody, anyone, some, any' (fem., masc.)
The substantival pronoun kas does not have a full declension. No distinction is made between masculine and feminine, singular and plural. The declension of kas is as follows:

Nom.	 	kas 'who, what, which, something, anything'
Gen.	 	kā 'whose'
Dat.	 	kam 'to whom'
Acc.	 	ko 'whom, what'
Loc.	 	replaced by adverb kur 'where', or the locative of kurš: kurā 'in which'.
kurš/kura, kāds/kāda are inflected according to the a-stem and ā-stem paradigms, respectively.

Compound indefinite pronouns are formed by adding the particles kaut or jeb- to the 'k-pronouns':

kaut kas 'something, anything' --
kaut kurš, kaut kura 'somebody, anybody' (masc., fem.)
kaut kāds, kaut kāda 'somebody, someone' (masc., fem.)
jebkas 'anything' --
jebkurš, jebkura 'anybody, anyone' (masc., fem.)
jebkāds, jebkāda 'anybody, anyone' (masc., fem.)
Other indefinite pronouns are (masculine and feminine forms, respectively): viens/viena 'one', cits/cita 'another', dažs/daža 'some, several'. These are inflected according to the a-stem paradigm for the masculine form and the ā-stem paradigm for the feminine form.

13 Adjectives
Adjectives agree with their nouns in number, gender and case, whether used attributively or predicatively, for example:

Melns kaķis pārskrēja ceļam 'A black cat ran across the street'
Melni kaķi pārskrēja ceļam 'Black cats ran across the street'
Kaķis ir melns 'The cat is black'
Kaķi ir melni 'Cats are black'
The distinction between indefinite and definite nouns is made by the different forms of an adjective, which accompanies the noun:

 	 	Indefinite	 	Definite
 	 	lab-s draugs 'a good friend'	 	lab-ais draugs 'the good friend'
 	 	lab-a grāmata 'a good book'	 	lab-ā grāmata 'the good book'
13.1 Inflection of the Indefinite Form
The indefinite adjectives are a much older form than the definite adjectives. Today, the masculine adjective in the nominative singular thus has the ending -s or -š; the feminine adjective in the nominative singular, -a.

In older Latvian, there were also adjectives ending with -is and -us. These forms have later flowed into the a-stems and ā-stems. Two parallel forms have arisen from the many old u-stem adjectives, which often have different meanings in Standard Written Latvian, for example ass 'sharp', ašs 'quick'; plats 'broad', plašs 'widespread'. Parallelism in adjectives of one and the same stem is an archaic phenomenon, which is still widely found in dialects and folkloristic texts.

The indefinite adjectives are declined according to the a-stems for the three masculine noun declensions (I, II, II) and according to the ā-stems for the three feminine declensions (IV, V, VI). For example, the nominative masculine: skaļš bērns 'noisy child', skaļš orķestris 'loud orchestra', skaļš tirgus 'noisy market'; the nominative feminine: balta lapsa 'white fox', balta pūce 'white owl', balta govs 'white cow'.

Paradigm for stiprs pamats 'strong foundation', dievišķīga skaņa 'heavenly sound':

Masculine	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	stipr-s pamats	 	stipr-i pamati
Gen.	 	stipr-a pamata	 	stipr-u pamatu
Dat.	 	stipr-am pamatam	 	stipr-iem pamatiem
Acc.	 	stipr-u pamatu	 	stipr-us pamatus
Loc.	 	stipr-ā pamatā	 	stipr-os pamatos
 	 	 	 	 
Feminine	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	dievišķīg-a skaņa	 	dievišķīg-as skaņas
Gen.	 	dievišķīg-as skaņas	 	dievišķīg-u skaņu
Dat.	 	dievišķīg-ai skaņai	 	dievišķīg-ām skaņām
Acc.	 	dievišķīg-u skaņu	 	dievišķīg-as skaņas
Loc.	 	dievišķīg-ā skaņā	 	dievišķīg-ās skaņās
13.2 Inflection of the Definite Form
The definite declension is a lengthened form of the indefinite declension, in which the ending has been modified over time according to certain phonetic rules. The definite adjectives were created before the end-vowels in multi-syllable words had begun to be shortened or lost: the old pronoun jis (masculine) or jī (feminine) of the io- stem, which seemed to have had a relative meaning or function, was attached to the long ending of the unshortened definite adjective. Both parts of the word were declined separately.

The definite adjective in the feminine, and its changes, can be illustrated by the following example of mazā 'the little (fem.)' in the nominative and dative:

Nom.	 	*mazā + jī > *mazājī > *mazā(j)i > *mazāj > mazā
Dat.	 	*mazai + jai > *mazaijai > mazajai
The masculine dative singular mazajam was formed in analogy to the feminine dative singular mazajai. The other case forms have arisen in a similar manner. Forms with -aj- have been retained only in the dative and locative of the masculine and feminine, in both singular and plural. In present day Lithuanian, the longer forms of definite adjectives have been retained to a much fuller extent. In older texts, the -ms ending can also be found for the dative plural in the masculine and feminine, for example: *mazajiems, *mazajāms.

Paradigm for mazais putns 'the little bird', mazā meitene 'the little girl':

Masculine	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	maz-ais putns	 	maz-ie putni
Gen.	 	maz-ā putna	 	maz-o putnu
Dat.	 	maz-ajam putnam	 	maz-ajiem putniem
Acc.	 	maz-o putnu	 	maz-os putnus
Loc.	 	maz-ajā putnā	 	maz-ajos putnos
 	 	 	 	 
Feminine	 	Singular	 	Plural
Nom.	 	maz-ā meitene	 	maz-ās meitenes
Gen.	 	maz-ās meitenes	 	maz-o meiteņu
Dat.	 	maz-ajai meitenei	 	maz-ajām meitenēm
Acc.	 	maz-o meiteni	 	maz-ās meitenes
Loc.	 	maz-ajā meitenē	 	maz-ajās meitenēs
13.3 Degrees of Comparison
Latvian adjectives have three degrees of comparison: the positive, the comparative, and the superlative. All three degrees have both indefinite and definite forms. The forms of the positive degree have been described in sections 13.1 and 13.2 above.

13.3.1 The Comparative Degree

The comparative is signified by the suffix -āk-; it is formed by inserting the suffix -āk- between the stem and the ending of both the indefinite and definite adjective:

 	 	Indefinite	 	Definite
Masc.	 	maz-āk-s nazis 'a smaller knife'	 	maz-āk-ais nazis 'the smaller knife'
Fem.	 	maz-āk-a pils 'a smaller castle'	 	maz-āk-ā pils 'the smaller castle'
The comparative forms are inflected according to the paradigms of the corresponding positive adjective endings above.

Often, the definite comparative is used as a superlative, the succession being thus: mazs, mazāks, mazākais 'small, smaller, smallest'. (For more about the superlative cf. 13.3.2.)

The -āk- form as comparative is unique to Latvian alone. In its closest related languages it is not found. The outwardly similar form in Lithuanian (-okas) denotes an increase in degree of the attribute, not a comparison of the attribute to itself.

The old Indo-European comparative has been lost in Latvian. Only a few traces remain, for example pastars 'final, last', which is the comparative of the substantivized adjective (compare Lith. pāstaras, Latin posterus).

13.3.2 The Superlative Degree

In Latvian as well as in Lithuanian, the old form of the superlative degree has disappeared. Today the superlative can be expressed as the definite form of the comparative (see above), or as a compound where the non-accented prefix vis- is joined to the definite form of the comparative; for example:

Masc.	 	vis-maz-ākais nazis 'the smallest knife'
Fem.	 	vis-maz-ākā pils 'the smallest castle'
The superlative is most often formed with the definite ending; indefinite superlatives, though rare, are also observed. The superlative forms are inflected according to the paradigms of the corresponding comparative adjective endings.

In folklore, dialects, and older texts, the superlative is expressed by visu (the unshortened form of vis-) + the comparative, for example visu lielākais 'the very largest'. This form is occasionally used to give an archaic character to present day texts.

The definite form of the superlative can also be formed by placing the pronoun pats/pati in front of the definite form of the comparative, for example: pats mazākais nazis 'the smallest knife', pati mazākā pils 'the smallest castle'.

14 Mood
There are five moods in Latvian: indicative (unmarked), imperative, subjunctive, debitive and relative (also called evidential).

14.1 The Imperative
There are two imperative forms in Latvian: one for the second person singular and one for the second person plural. The imperative of the second person singular is identical to the second person singular present indicative. For example: nāc 'come', atvaino 'pardon me', piedod 'forgive me', strādā 'work', guli 'sleep', mācies 'study', mazgājies 'wash yourself'.

The imperative in the 2nd plural is formed by changing the 2nd person plural endings -at or āt in the indicative present to -iet or, in the reflexive, the endings -aties or -āties to -ieties. For example: atvainojiet 'pardon me', piedodiet 'forgive me', strādājiet 'work', guliet 'sleep', celieties 'wake up' steidzieties 'hurry'.

The root is always formed with the consonant of the 2nd person singular present, for example: nāciet 'come' instead of *nākiet!

The imperative can also be expressed for the third person (singular and plural) by adding the particle lai 'let, may' before the verb in the third person indicative. For example: lai nāk 'let him/her/them come', lai viņi strādā 'let them work'.

To express the imperative in the first person plural, an adhortative form is used, which is identical with the first person plural of the future indicative. For example: iesim 'let us go', strādāsim 'let us work', saģērbsimies 'let us get dressed'.

The imperative in the first person plural can also be expressed by an adhortative which is identical with the first person plural of the present indicative. For example: dzeram, brāļi 'let us drink, brothers'; raudam, meitas 'let us lament, daughters', ejam 'let us go'.

The negative imperative is formed the same way as the negative indicative: nenāc 'don't come', neguliet 'don't sleep', neuztraucies 'don't worry'.

14.2 The Subjunctive
The subjunctive (also called conditional) is formed by adding the ending -tu (or -tos in the reflexive) to the infinitive stem. This form is the same for all persons. For example būt 'to be', būtu 'would be': Kaut man būtu daudz naudas 'If only I had lots of money'; darīt 'to do', darītu 'would do': Viņi to darītu, ja viņi būtu jauni 'They would do it if they were young'.

In older literature and in folklore, the archaic first person plural form with the ending -tum/-tumies and the second person plural form with the ending -tut can be found. These forms are not used in Standard Written Latvian. For example: Kā būtu, ja mēs pašu nelabo ņemtum palīgā? 'What would happen if we took the devil to our help?'

14.3 The Debitive
The debitive, a mood to denote necessity or obligation, is formed by prefixing the particle jā- to the third person of the present indicative, which then takes the dative form of the subject. The jā- is used only to form debitives. For example:

 	 	Indicative	 	Debitive
 	 	es eju 'I go'	 	man jāiet 'I must go'
 	 	viņi sarakstās 'they write to each other'	 	Viņiem jāsarakstās 'they must write to each other'
In the debitive, the accusative object is changed into the nominative. For example:

 	 	Indicative	 	Debitive
 	 	es rakstu vēstuli 'I write a letter'	 	man jāraksta vēstule 'I must write a letter'
 	 	mēs kuļam labību 'we thresh the grain'	 	mums jākuļ labība 'we must thresh the grain'
The verb būt 'to be' is irregular, and the debitive is formed by prefixing jā- to the infinitive, instead of the third person of the present indicative. For example:

 	 	Indicative	 	Debitive
 	 	es esmu 'I am'	 	man jābūt 'I must be'
 	 	tu esi 'you (sg) are'	 	tev jābūt 'you must be'
According to Endzelīns (1951), the prefix jā- (dialectal form ju-) has arisen from the archaic relative pronoun *ios. The form jā- is the common form of the genitive singular and ablative singular of the io-stem. Over the course of time, this old relative pronoun attained the meaning of a form-bearing affix.

The debitive has three tenses: present, past, and future, which are expressed by the auxilliary būt 'to be' + the debitive form. In the present, the auxilliary ir 'is' is usually omitted. For example:

 	 	Debitive
Present	 	Tev (ir) jādzied 'You must sing'
Past	 	Tev bija jādzied 'You had to sing'
Future	 	Tev būs jādzied 'You shall have to sing'
Recent grammars challenge the designation of the debitive as a mood (Mathiassen, 1997). Nau (1998) calls the debitive a modal voice.

14.4 The Relative
In Latvian, the relative (also known as the evidential) is a late formation which has not been inherited from older verbal moods. Instead, the relative function has been taken over by the ot-gerund (the indeclinable present participle ending in -ot/-oties), and the indeclinable future participle ending in -šot/-šoties. The latter no longer has a participial meaning in Standard Written Latvian. According to Mathiassen (1997), the ot-gerund reflects a petrified form, derived from the dative case of the masculine singular of the present active participle.

The relative mood has four tenses: the simple present and future, and the compound present and future. The relative is used to denote indirect speech or to convey unsure claims.

The relative in the present tense is formed by adding the endings -ot/-oties to the present stem. The relative in the future tense is formed by adding the endings -šot/šoties to the future stem. There are no personal endings, and the same form is used for all persons. For example:

 	 	Infinitive	 	Present Relative	 	Future Relative
 	 	mīlēt 'to love'	 	mīlot 'supposedly loves'	 	mīlēšot 'supposedly shall love'
The relative in the compound present is formed by the present relative of the verb būt 'to be' + the past participle, for example: esot gājis 'supposed to have gone'.

The relative in the compound future is formed by the future relative of the verb būt 'to be' + the past participle, for example: būšot gājis 'supposed to (shall) have gone'. This form is rarely used.

15 Interrogative Sentences and the Interrogative Particle vai
A general interrogative sentence can be formed in Latvian by maintaining the same word order of a declaratory sentence, but by raising the pitch of the voice towards the end of the sentence. For example:

Jānis strādā. 'John is working'.
Jānis strādā? 'Is John working?'
General interrogative sentences can also be formed with the help of the interrogative particle vai, which is added to the sentence as the initial word. For example: Vai Jānis strādā? 'Is John working?'

Other interrogative sentences are formed by using interrogative pronouns, interrogative adverbs, and the interrogative qualifier cik 'how much'. The interrogative pronouns kas, kurš/kura, kāds/kāda were discussed in chapter 12.2 above. Interrogative adverbs in Latvian are:

kur 'where'
kurp 'where to'
uz kurieni 'where to'
no kurienes 'where from'
kad 'when'
kā 'how'
kāpēc 'why'
kādēļ 'why, for what reason'
Examples of interrogative sentences:

Kur ir muzejs? 'Where is the museum?'
Kad tu būsi darbā? 'When will you be at work?'
Kāpēc mums jāgaida? 'Why do we have to wait?'