Old Russian Online
Series Introduction
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum

The title Old Russian serves to denote the language of the earliest documents of the eastern branch of the Slavic family of languages. The composition of the oldest surviving documents generally dates to some time within the 10th century AD. The term Old Russian is something of a misnomer in that the initial stages of the language which it denotes predate the dialectal divisions which mark the nascent distinction between modern Russian, Belorussian, and Ukrainian. Thus Old Russian serves as a common parent to all three of the major East Slavic languages, and as such a more appropriate term for the language is Old East Slavic. Unfortunately, in addition to being cumbersome, this terminology is not universally applied even within modern scholarship. Moreover, as the language Old Russian formed the medium of communication throughout the lands of the Rus [Rusĭ], about whom we will have more to say elsewhere in these lessons, some scholars employ the term Rusian for Old Russian. This is perhaps the most convenient of all the terms, but lamentably it is also the least commonly used.

Throughout these lessons, therefore, the terminology Old Russian is employed with a bow to tradition. However Old Russian is no more the oldest form of Russian than Latin is the oldest form of Spanish: Old Russian is equally Old Belorussian and Old Ukrainian. The terms Russian and Russia will also appear throughout these lessons; but unless qualified by the adjective modern (as in the modern Russian language), these terms should be taken in their historical sense: relating to the Rus.

1. Linguistic Heredity
At some point before the creation of the oldest written monuments of Old Russian, the Slavic tribes seem to have formed a more or less homogeneous speaking community with relatively minor regional variation. Scholars apply the term Common Slavic (CS or CoS), or Proto-Slavic (PSl), to the putative language spoken by this as yet little differentiated Slavic community. This language, some of whose features can be reconstructed by scholars, serves as a parent to all subsequent Slavic languages. Proto-Slavic itself seems to derive from a parent, termed Proto-Indo-European (PIE), which serves as the common ancestor for an even wider array of languages ranging from Iceland in the west to India and beyond in the east: the Germanic languages (e.g. German, English, Dutch, Icelandic), the Italic (Latin, Italian, Spanish, French), Hellenic (Greek, Mycenaean), Celtic (Old Irish, Welsh, Gaelic), and many Indic languages (Sanskrit, Hindi, Marathi) all belong to this Indo-European family, among others. The close affinity of the Baltic languages to the Slavic languages leads many scholars to suppose that between Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Slavic there was an intervening period of close habitation between Baltic and Slavic tribes, with the dialects being sufficiently intelligible to all to be viewed as part of a single language, Proto-Balto-Slavic.

Within the Proto-Slavic speaking community, migration and subsequent isolation of one subgroup or tribe from another tended to accentuate dialectal distinctions. As this process progressed, we find the emergence of three broad groupings within the Slavic language family: West Slavic (including modern Czech and Polish), South Slavic (including Bulgarian and Macedonian), and East Slavic (modern Russian, Belorussian, Ukrainian). In each subgrouping, the members share some linguistic features among themselves which do not pertain to other groupings. In particular we find that, while Old Church Slavonic (OCS) shows features shared by South Slavic languages, Old Russian (OR or ORu) demonstrates its affiliation with the East Slavic languages.

If we look at the linguistic characteristics of the various subgroups of the Slavic language family, there is no one single feature that will identify a particular language as belonging, say, to the East Slavic group. Each particular feature is shared by languages in more than one subgroup. What we therefore seek for the purposes of linguistic classification is a minimal set of features which we can say are shared, as a whole, by members of one subgroup but not, as a whole, by members of another subgroup. The following list provides a set of three characteristics which serve, on the whole, to distinguish the East Slavic branch from the others. The features are stated in terms of how certain phonemic characteristics of the parent Proto-Slavic evolved within languages pertaining to the East Slavic subgroup (Vinokur, 1971).

The reflexes of CS *tj, *dj are č, ž respectively. That is, where we find the phonemic sequence *tj, for example, in Common Slavic, this becomes the phoneme č in languages belonging to the East Slavic subgroup. For example, CS *svetja yields Old Russian свѣча [svěča], but within South Slavic this becomes OCS свѣща [svěšča] 'candle'. Similarly CS *medja yields Old Russian мєжа [meža], but OCS мєжда [mežda] 'street' (cf. Schmalstieg, 1995).
The reflexes of CS *tort, *tert groups are respectively torot and teret. This rule is stated in shorthand, where *t actually denotes any CS consonant, and *r represents any of the liquid resonants (i.e. *r, l). If we take the sequence *tort, the rule states that, when *or or *ol appear between any two consonants in Common Slavic, then in East Slavic languages a secondary *o appears after the *r or *l but before the final consonant. Thus CS *gordŭ becomes Old Russian городъ [gorodŭ], whereas in the South Slavic branch it yields OCS градъ [gradŭ] 'city'. Further examples: Old Russian перегнѫвъ [peregnǫvŭ], but OCS прѣгънѫвъ [prěgŭnǫvŭ] 'having bent'; Old Russian Володимира [Volodimira], but OCS Владимира [Vladimira] 'Vladimir' (cf. Matthews, 1960).
The loss of nasal vowels. In the transition from Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Slavic, we find that certain vowels tended to become nasalized in certain environments. In particular, when PIE *o was followed by a nasal consonant, and this in turn followed by a second consonant, then the nasal tended to drop in Common Slavic, but the *o retained a nasal quality much as the vowel in the French word bon. For example the third person plural present tense ending PIE *-onti yielded CS *-ǫtĭ, where *ǫ denotes a nasalized *o. Through similar processes the vowel *e acquired nasalization, represented by *ę. These nasalized vowels are retained in many modern Slavic languages, for example Polish. But the nasalization fell away in all languages of the East Slavic branch. Thus we find Old Russian язꙑкъ [jazykŭ] 'language', but OCS ѩзꙑкъ [językŭ]; also Old Russian станути [stanuti] 'to stand', but OCS станѫти [stanǫti]. It should be noted, however, that the emulation of OCS manuscript tradition meant that the letters representing nasalized vowels in OCS were still employed in Old Russian writing. Vacillation in the Ostromir Gospel (both глаголя and глаголѩ 'saying' occur) highlights that nasalization was not present, with the result that nasal and non-nasal symbols were used interchangeably (Schmalstieg, 1995).
Debate continues, however, regarding just how wide was the linguistic gap between Old Russian and its South Slavic cousin Old Church Slavonic. The heart of the debate lies in the fact that the earliest manuscripts of Old Russian generally comprise East Slavic redactions of earlier OCS manuscripts, and the conventions of OCS spelling likely exerted a heavy influence on Old Russian orthography. Thus some scholars propose a scenario for the 10th and 11th centuries in which the Old Russian manuscripts show a "bookish" language which remained distinct from the everyday language of discourse.

Other scholars, however, take issue with such arguments, notably Lunt (1987). As Lunt points out, no direct evidence regarding the everyday speech in the lands of the Rus has survived, and so notions regarding any differences between common speech and the language of the manuscripts remain completely speculative. Rather, discussions of the speech practices of the Rus must be based on the evidence in hand, namely inscriptions, manuscripts, and even what little graffiti survives. Moreover all indications from accounts of the original missions of Saints Cyril and Methodius suggest that, in the time period surrounding and immediately following the missions, variations among Slavic dialects were not so great as to impede mutual intelligibility. Lunt therefore proposes that Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic be viewed as two variants of the latest period of the common Slavic tongue, that is, as two variants of Late Common Slavic (LCS or LCoS) (Lunt, 1987).

Two major points support this view. The first concerns the presence of the jers ъ, ь (ŭ, ĭ). Both Old Russian and OCS preserve these reduced vowels that first arise in Common Slavic. Moreover they appear equally accurately in the earliest manuscripts of both languages, in the sense that they generally appear in positions where they would be expected on etymological grounds. In addition, they were true vowels: syllables containing jers are counted in syllable-counting poetry (Lunt, 1987). The scholar Trubetzkoy has established that the conditions determining when jers are strong or weak (terminology which we shall explain in the lessons) are shared by all Slavic languages. Thus their presence as a phonetic entity in a form that precedes their full vocalism (strong jers) or loss (weak jers) must be a characteristic of Common Slavic. Since the earliest remnants of both OCS and Old Russian still maintain the jers intact, before the shifts under the strong or weak conditions, these documents must represent a late stage of Common Slavic, before the breakup into respective daughter languages (Lunt, 1987).

The second point concerns pronunciation. We have seen above that Old Russian loses the nasalization accompanying some vowels from other dialects. However we still find a regular correspondence: OCS ǫ corresponds to Old Russian u, and OCS ę corresponds to Old Russian ě. This means that, in the earliest period of the language, the speaker of Old Russian could always read OCS with a local pronunciation and the result would be intelligible (Lunt, 1987).

The argument that OCS and Old Russian are both variants of Late Common Slavic has not convinced all scholars. But it does have a practical benefit: it provides a theoretical framework within which to view OCS and Old Russian as two remarkably similar languages. Their similarity is such that, at least for the earliest documents, one can profitably read Old Russian merely with a knowledge of OCS and a superficial understanding of the three characteristics of East Slavic mentioned above.

2. Geographical Location
By the time of the earliest documents, the speakers of Old Russian inhabit a vast expanse of eastern Europe between the two political poles of Novgorod in the north and Kiev in the south. However the events surrounding how the East Slavs arrived in this region, and from where they came, remain shrouded in mystery. Some vague references from Latin and Greek authors whose works predate the advent of writing among the Slavs nevertheless provide some tantalizing clues.

Among the works of the first century AD, we find two which mention tribes plausibly to be identified with the Slavic group or its subgroups. In his treatise Naturalis historia, Pliny the Elder employs the term Venedi, Veneti for tribes which modern scholars surmise to be early Slavs. Pliny mentions in particular a tribe known as the Anti, saying they inhabit the region between the Sea of Azov and the Caspian Sea, an area then controlled by the Sarmatians (Gimbutas, 1971). Also writing in the first century, Tacitus likewise mentions the Venedi or Veneti in his survey of tribes impinging upon the Roman Empire, the Germania. In this work he mentions that the Venedi consist of robbers and thieves who wander the forests and mountains. According to Tacitus they generally inhabited the region between the Peucini tribe (Germanic Bastarnae) in the eastern Carpathians and the Fenni, whose location is left unclear (Gimbutas, 1971).

In the second century, Claudius Ptolemy mentions what is presumably the same tribe in his work De geographia. He employs the term Grk. Ouenedai, Lat. Venedae, and he labels the Baltic Sea the "Venedic Gulf" by virtue of the tribe's proximity to its shores. Based on Ptolemy's descriptions, scholars surmise that these Venedae inhabited a region north of the Goths, to the west of the Baltic tribes (Galindians and Sudinians), and to the southwest of the Finnic tribes (Matthews, 1960).

It is not until the sixth century that we find references to the Veneti that appear to make distinctions between subgroups. In his work De origine actibusque Getarum, or simply the Getica, Jordanes employs Venetae as a general term. But he identifies two separate tribes within this group: the Antes or Antae, and the Sclaveni. He says that all are 'of one blood' (cf. Gimbutas, 1971). Generally the Venetae are said to inhabit the region between the Dniester and Dnieper. Of the two subgroups, Jordanes locates the westernmost group, the Sclaveni, in the vicinity of the Carpathian mountains, with the Vistula river to their north, and the Dniester river to the east (Gimbutas, 1971). The region inhabited by the Antae lies to the east of the land of the Sclaveni.

In this same period, Procopius of Caesarea, writing in Greek, mentions the Antai and Sklabe:noi in his work De bello Gothico. Of the Sklabenoi he states that they were intruders into the region of the lower Danube (Gimbutas, 1971). Moreover he asserts that both tribes spoke the same language and jointly inhabited an expansive area. Procopius seems to have been acquainted with Slavic troops in the Byzantine army. He provides us with a description of their physical features: "The Sklavini and Antes do not differ in appearance: all of them are tall and very strong, their skin and hair are neither very light nor dark, but all are ruddy of face. They live a hard life of the lowest grade just like the Messagetae, and are just as dirty as they" (quoted in Gimbutas, 1971).

The historical descriptions mentioned above are unspecific at best. At worst, they do not refer to Slavic tribes at all, a possibility which is difficult to rule out. If we do however draw the tentative conclusion that the above tribes refer to the Slavs before the advent of their own written documents, it seems probable that the Antae are those most likely to be identified as the forerunners of the East Slavs that appear to us in the earliest records of Old Russian.

3. Language Contact
The Old Russian language itself contains traces of the myriad interactions of its speakers with neighboring peoples in the course of trade and cultural exchange. These linguistic clues predominantly take the form of words borrowed from neighboring languages into Old Russian. The same process occurs in nearly all languages, and Old Church Slavonic itself adopted numerous words from the neighboring Germans and Greeks in their missionary work in Moravia. Since OCS had a profound influence on Old Russian, the latter acquired many words from the Germans and Greeks indirectly via OCS. Frequently these terms related to ecclesiastical themes. But the speakers of Old Russian also interacted with other neighboring cultures independently of the southern Slavs, and we find borrowings that serve to highlight these exchanges.

One such group of loanwords comes from the profound commercial and cultural ties that the early Rus shared with Scandinavia. The following terms come from Scandinavian borrowings (Matthews, 1960):

варягъ [varjagŭ] 'Varangian', corresponding to Old Norse vaeringr 'bodyguard';
кълбягъ [kŭlbjagŭ] 'merchant', corresponding to ON kylfingr;
бьрковьскъ [bĭrkovĭskŭ] 'weight of 10 poods', derived from the place name OSw. Biaerkoe 'Bjoerkoe'.
Another group of borrowings highlights economic ties with Germanic peoples. This interaction increased as the Germans pushed eastward along the Baltic Sea into Prussia. Numerous terms relate to titles and units of measure (Matthews, 1960):

пудъ [pudŭ] 'pood' (40 Russian lbs.), corresponding to Low Ger. pund, in turn derived from Latin pondus 'weight';
провстъ [provstŭ] 'provost' < Low Ger. provest;
мастєръ, мештерь [masterŭ, mešterĭ] 'master', cf. Ger. Meister;
рꙑтарь [rytarĭ] 'knight', cf. Ger. Ritter;
герьцокъ, гѣрцикъ [gerĭcokŭ, gěrcikŭ] 'duke', cf. Ger. Herzog.
But at the tail end of the Old Russian period we find later borrowings related to the exchange of fabrics in the 14th-15th centuries (Matthews, 1960):

бархатъ [barxatŭ] 'velvet' < Low Ger. barchant;
шида [šida] 'silk' < MHG si:de.
Of course, Byzantium played a privileged role in both the economic life and religious development of the Rus. A wealth of terms coming from all aspects of daily life provide a testament to this intertwining of cultures (Matthews, 1960):

теремъ [teremŭ] 'palace, court' < Grk. teremnon;
Олєна [Olena] 'Helen' < Grk. helene:, a proper name;
Овдотья [Ovdotĭja] 'Eudokia' < Grk. Eudokia, a proper name;
скиния [skinija] 'tabernacle' < Grk. ske:ne:;
фонарь [fonarĭ] 'street-lamp' < Grk. phanarion;
гигасъ [gigasŭ] 'giant' < Grk. gigas, later reformed on the genitive: гигантъ [gigantŭ] < Grk. gigantos.
Some of these terms borrowed from Greek were themselves loanwords taken over from Latin. The following terms provide a small sample (Matthews, 1960):

миса [misa] 'tureen' < Grk. me:nsa < Lat. mensa;
костєль [kostelĭ] 'church' < Grk. kasteli < Lat. castellum.
In addition, as trade extended eastward, the Rus came into contact with Turkic cultures. The influence of Turkic cultures became more profound with the periodic attacks that culminated in the Tartar invasion. But the 13th-century Codex Cumanicus contains several Turkic loanwords that testify to Turkic influence preceding the invasion. The following list provides a sample of Old Russian terms of Turkic origin (Matthews, 1960):

орда [orda] 'encampment' < Trk. orda 'encampment';
улусъ [ulusŭ] 'settlement, country' < Trk. ulus 'people';
катѹна [katuna] 'wife' < Trk. qatun 'wife, woman'.
4. History and Documents
No specific dates fix the period of Old Russian. Rather we may suppose from historical sources that its earliest stages represent something close to what was spoken upon the reception of the Byzantine liturgy in the middle of the 10th century, since this would likely have marked the opening of the literary tradition that produced the earliest surviving manuscripts. That would place the beginning of the Old Russian period sometime in the 10th century AD. Since no monuments have survived from this period, however, scholars generally agree that Old Russian as a documented system begins in the 11th century. At the other extreme, the end date is similarly flexible. Some scholars prefer to place the end of the Old Russian period relatively early, sometime near the beginning of the 14th century. Others prefer to place the end closer to the latter part of the 15th century, as the center of literary production shifts from Kiev to Moscow in the waning years of Tartar rule.

The corpus of Old Russian, broadly understood, is rather expansive. Its remains take a variety of forms. In particular we find roughly 180 inscriptions dating from the 11th to 14th centuries. Most famous among these is the Tmutorokan stone, discovered near Taman in 1792 and dated 1068. The inscription states that Prince Gleb measured a distance of 14,000 sazhens between Tmutorokan and Kerch across the Strait of Kerch (Vinokur, 1971).

Most interestingly, in the 1950s archaeologists discovered numerous documents in excavations near Novgorod. These birch-bark letters date from middle of 12th century. The texts are scratched on birch-bark with bone instruments. The content consists predominantly of private letters, but the finds also contain testaments and agreements (Sokolsky, 1966).

The preponderance of the remaining documentary evidence for Old Russian consists of manuscripts. Roughly 1000 manuscripts remain dating from the 11th to 14th centuries. More than 20 of these manuscripts come from the 11th century specifically. Unfortunately we have no single preserved manuscript from the 10th century (Vinokur, 1971). The following list provides a brief overview of some of the more important specimens of Old Russian manuscript evidence (cf. Vinokur, 1971; Sokolsky, 1966):

The Ostromir Gospel. This is the oldest of the 11th-century manuscripts, dated 1056-1057. It is named for the governor of Novgorod who commissioned it. It consists of 294 folios, in double columns, with 3 illustrations. The contents provide readings for church services arranged according to the days of the week, beginning with Easter. It includes an afterward written by Deacon Gregory illustrating the literary language of the period.
Svjatoslav's Miscellanies. These are named after the prince of Kiev, son of Jaroslav the Wise, in whose collection they resided. Two copies are extant: one from 1073 (illustrated), the other from 1076. They contain collections based on Byzantine Greek texts translated for Bulgarian Tsar Simeon in the 10th century. The Old Russian Miscellanies were copied from these original translations.
Archangel Evangelary. This text was discovered in Archangel in the 1880s, and it dates to 1092. It contains a weekly Gospel written by two scribes.
Mstislav's Gospels, Galician Gospels, Dobrilov's Gospels. The manuscript of Mstislav's Gospels seems to have been written before 1117. The manuscript of the Galician Gospels, dating from 1144, represents the language of the southwestern region Galicia-Volhynia. The manuscript of Dobrilov's Gospels, from 1164, illustrates early Ukrainian linguistic features (Vinokur, 1971).
Deeds of gift. We have a number of documents recording gifts presented to monasteries. One such document, from ca. 1130, is from Grand Prince Mstislav to the Yurev monastery in Novgorod. Another, from the late 12th century, is from monk Varlaam to Khutyn monastery. This shows local features stemming from northern Russia (Vinokur, 1971).
Miscellany of Uspensky Cathedral in Moscow. This important manuscript dates roughly to 1190. It contains the oldest version of the Legend of Saints Boris and Gleb, as well as the Life of Feodosiy of the Monastery of the Caves.
Russian Law, or Russian Truth. This document provides an example of early East Slavic legal code. It survives in three versions, the oldest extant copy dating to 1282, from the area of Novgorod.
Laurentian Manuscript. This manuscript, dated 1377, was copied in the Suzdal region. It occupies a place of prestige among Old Russian literary monuments as it contains one of the more important versions of the Primary Chronicle. This was composed in the south of the Rus lands over the course of the 12th century through the hands of several monks, notable among them Nikon and Nestor. The manuscript also contains a chronicle of the region of Suzdal.
The Tale of Igor's Host. This work provides one of the most striking, yet hotly debated, monuments of Old Russian epic literature. Its composition dates to the end of the 12th century. It only survives in a printed edition from the year 1800, itself based on a 15th- or 16th-century manuscript (Vinokur, 1971).
5. Remark on the Lesson Plan and Glossary
The functional view espoused by the lessons of this series is that Old Russian (Old East Slavic) shows such a great degree of similarity to Old Church Slavonic that it behooves the reader to draw parallels whenever possible. For that reason, the sections discussing the grammar of the language mirror those of the series Old Church Slavonic Online for ease of cross-reference.

Moreover, the headword entries for the glossed texts are keyed to the Lexicon Palaeoslovenico-Graeco-Latinum of Miklosich (1865), with minor variations. The reader will note that this forms the standard of lexical reference for the OCS series as well. Hopefully this will foster the attitude that the two languages, OCS and Old Russian, should be read together, knowledge of one informing the other. On the one hand, by all accounts this appears to be how the copyists of Old Russian manuscripts themselves understood Old Russian. On the other hand, the discussion above on the relation of the two provides a theoretical framework in which the two may be viewed profitably as flip-sides of the same coin. As one professor aptly put it, the reader will get a long way by "studying Old Russian as if it were Old Church Slavonic spelled poorly".

Perhaps a more logical choice of lexical standard would have been Sreznevskij's Materials for an Old Russian Dictionary (1893-1912). While long the standard reference in the field, being wholly in Russian it might pose a barrier to some readers of these lessons. Moreover, as it employs a standardized Old Russian orthography, it already eliminates, say, the nasalized ǫ in favor of u. This creates a difficulty in trying to compare Old Russian with OCS: it is much more straightforward to read an OCS form with a nasalized ǫ and immediately conclude that the corresponding Old Russian term will be found with u. The reverse is more difficult: an Old Russian form with u may correspond to an OCS form with either u or ǫ. For this reason it has seemed advisable to normalize to OCS spelling and to keep in mind the East Slavic features outlined above and later in the lessons to make the conversion to Old Russian.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 1
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
I. The Great Sweep of Old Russian History
There were three major events that defined the earliest historical period of the East Slavic people:

the founding of Rus in 862 AD with the invitation to the Varangians;
the adoption of Christianity in 988 AD by prince Vladimir; and
the Tartar invasion in 1237 AD.
To understand each of these events and its impact on the development of the early Russian cultural and political institutions, we must first understand something of the context within which they occurred.

The description below, and the Introductions to the lessons that follow, attempt to provide an overview of the geographic, economic, cultural, religious, and political conditions surrounding the composition of Old Russian texts during the "classical" period from the 11th to 15th centuries.

II. Eastern European Geography and Trade
II.i Geography
The Eastern Slavs make their appearance in history already situated in the vast expanse of Eastern Europe. We may speak broadly of this people as Russians, but only if we are careful to note that, in this early period, the term is merely a convenience for speaking inclusively of the ancestors of large populations of modern Russia, Belorussia, and Ukraine. That this was not their original homeland we may surmise from, among other sorts of physical evidence, the linguistic traits they share with various branches of the Indo-European linguistic family tree. Their first mention in historical records comes not from their own monuments, but from authors writing in Greek, Latin, and other languages. These authors themselves were often quite removed from the East Slavic tribes and so the veracity of their claims leaves much to be desired. Principally we infer from their writings a general sense of the location of the Slavs as a whole. We must yet wait centuries for the nascent Russian culture to break into the historical record with its own voice.

We find the earliest Eastern Slavs located in the vast expanse between two roughly north-south-running mountain ranges. The Carpathians shielded the "civilized" plain of the Danube River which marked the extent of the Roman Empire from the wilderness that lay beyond. The variegated territory which extended between the Carpathians and the Ural Mountains far to their east provided the cradle of the Russian cultural birth.

The Black Sea, followed by the Caucasus Mountains, and completed by the landlocked Caspian Sea provided a natural boundary to the south. Abutting this southerly frontier from the north lay the steppe, a low-lying flattened geographic highway that would, centuries hence, provide the conduit for ruinous invasions of Europe, made all the worse for the Russians by the fact that, by dint of location, they were often the first to catch the full fury of the bloody onslaught.

As one moves north from this southerly belt the featureless terrain slowly yields to forest. Deciduous at first, the forest thickens relentlessly as its members trade in seasonal leaves for the perpetual spines of their coniferous cousins. The northern territory intersperses the forest with bog that further impedes travel. To the west of this wooded northerly expanse the terrain opens onto the shores of the Baltic Sea. Continuing north one passes Lakes Ladoga and Onega before encountering the White Sea and the inhospitable arctic climes beyond.

The densely wooded regions north of the steppe would have remained largely impassable to all but the most small-scale travel had not Nature provided its own highway system for extended travel: navigable rivers. From the eastern lip of the Baltic the river Dvina winds eastward into the uplands situated midway between the Carpathians and Urals. Here the Dvina comes within a geographic hair's breadth of the headwaters of the Volga, the region's great superhighway connecting the northerly reaches with the Caspian Sea in the south. As the Volga extends east from the uplands before making its sweeping turn south, its tributary the Oka meets it from the west. The two continue a short stretch southeast as one before the Kama, descending from the Urals and traveling eastward, finally joins them. The three continue together as the Volga, first southwest, then southeast, before finally emptying into the Caspian.

The net effect of the Volga's tributaries Oka and Kama is to provide a waterborne highway stretching east-west, starting at the easternmost extreme in the foothills of the Urals and flowing west into the central Uplands of the Russian expanse where, much later in the story of early Russia, Moscow was to grow from an early backwater into a unifying hub of the burgeoning Russian nation. But enabling further north-south travel were the rivers Dnieper and Don. The former trickles westward out of the Uplands, growing as it turns southward and finally empties into the Black Sea. Not to be outdone, the Don chooses an eastward path out of the central Uplands, until it to turns south and rushes toward the Black Sea, this time emptying in the Sea of Azov on the Black Sea's northeastern extreme.

Thus Nature provided both fertile, wooded lands and the ability to navigate them within the flat expanse to the west of the Urals. With a short break between them, the Dvina and Volga provided a north-south axis for travel from the Baltic to the Caspian. And by another short hop this path could be deflected to the Black Sea, where the jewel of the southerly belt awaited: Byzantium.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The following extract begins the famous text of the Invitation to the Varangians, found in the Primary Chronicle under the year 859 AD and following. The passage below describes the conditions among the East Slavs and neighboring tribes leading up to the invitation.

1 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ з.
 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
т -- number; <т> three hundred -- three hundred
ѯ -- number; <ѯ> sixty -- sixty
з -- number; <з> seven -- seven

2 - Имаху дань варязи изъ заморья на чюди и на словѣнехъ, на мери и на всѣхъ, и на кривичѣхъ; а козари имаху на полянѣхъ, и на северѣхъ, и на вятичѣхъ, имаху по бѣлѣй вѣверицѣ отъ дыма.

 Collapse All
Имаху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <имати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire -- received
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
варязи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- The Varangians
изъ -- preposition; <из> (w. gen.) from, out of -- from
заморья -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <заморьѥ> a transmarine region, (any) region across the sea -- across the sea
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
чюди -- noun; feminine locative singular of <чюдь> (collective) the Chuds (a Finnish tribe, in Estonia near Lake Peipus) -- the Chuds
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
словѣнехъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine locative plural of <словѣнинъ> Slovene, of the Slovene tribe (located on Lake Ilmen near Novgorod) -- the Slovenes
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
мери -- proper noun; feminine locative singular of <меря> (collective) the Merians (a Finnish tribe, in the region of Jaroslavl and Rostov, along the Volga river) -- the Merians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
всѣхъ -- proper noun; masculine locative plural of <весь> (collective) the Ves, Vepsians (a Finnish tribe between Lakes Ladoga and Belo-ozero) -- the Ves
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
кривичѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural <кривичи> (pl.) the Krivitchians (a Slavic tribe) -- the Krivitchians
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- But
козари -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <козаринъ> Khazar, of the Khazars (a Turkic tribe located along the Volga) -- the Khazars
имаху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <имати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire -- received (tribute)
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
полянѣхъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine locative plural of <полꙗнинъ> Polan, Polian, Polianian, of the Polianians (a Slavic tribe located along the Dnieper river) -- the Polianians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
северѣхъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine locative plural of <сѣвєръ> Severian, of the Severian tribe (a Slavic tribe located along the Sejm and Sula rivers) -- the Severians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- among
вятичѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <вꙗтичи> (pl.) the Vjatichi, Viatichi, Vyatichi (a Slavic tribe) -- the Vjatichi
имаху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <имати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire -- they received
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- (each) # The preposition по frequently has a distributive meaning
бѣлѣй -- adjective; feminine dative singular of <бѣлъ> white -- a white
вѣверицѣ -- noun; feminine dative singular of <вѣвєрица> squirrel -- squirrel (pelt)
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
дыма -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <дꙑмъ> smoke; hearth, home -- hearth

3 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ и.

 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
т -- number; <т> three hundred -- three hundred
ѯ -- number; <ѯ> sixty -- sixty
и -- number; <и> eight -- eight

4 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ ѳ.

 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
т -- number; <т> three hundred -- three hundred
ѯ -- number; <ѯ> sixty -- sixty
ѳ -- number; <ѳ> nine -- nine

5 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. о.
 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
т -- number; <т> three hundred -- three hundred
о -- number; <о> seventy -- seventy

6 - Изъгнаша варяги за море, и не даша имъ дани, и почаша сами в собѣ володѣти, и не бѣ в нихъ правды, и въста родъ на родъ, и быша в нихъ усобицѣ, и воевати почаша сами на ся.
 Collapse All
Изъгнаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <изгнати, иждєнѫ, иждєнєши> cast out, cast away; drive out, drive away -- They drove
варяги -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- the Varangians # Note the lack of palatalization in варяги, compared to the previous instance варязи. In the nominative plural, we expect the results of second palatalization after the shift *-oi> *-i; however after the shift *-ons> *-y in the accusative plural, we expect no palatalization. Here we see the proper unpalatalized reflex -g- of the accusative plural, but we also see that Old Russian frequently replaces the proper accusative plural ending -ы with the nominative form -и.
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- across
море -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <мор҄є> sea -- the sea
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
даша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <дати, дамь, даси> give -- they did... give
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- them
дани -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
почаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <почѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin, commence -- began
сами -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <самъ> self, oneself -- they
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- amongst
собѣ -- pronoun; locative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- themselves
володѣти -- verb; infinitive of <владѣти, -дѣѭ, -дѣѥши> (freq. w. instr.) rule, rule over, hold power (over) -- to rule
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- no
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- among
нихъ -- pronoun; masculine locative plural of <*и> he -- them
правды -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <правьда> justice -- peace # Note the use of the genitive, rather than nominative, in the presence of negation
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
въста -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въстати, -станѫ, -станєши> stand up, break out -- rose
родъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- clan
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- against
родъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- clan
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
быша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- among
нихъ -- pronoun; masculine locative plural of <*и> he -- them
усобицѣ -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <ѫсобица> discord, strife, sedition -- discord
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
воевати -- verb; infinitive of <воѥвати, воюѭ, воюѥши> fight, wage war -- to wage war
почаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <почѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin, commence -- began
сами -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <самъ> self, oneself -- they
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- against
ся -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- one another

7 - И рѣша сами в себѣ, "поищемъ собѣ князя, иже бы володѣлъ нами и судилъ по праву".
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- spoke
сами -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <самъ> self, oneself -- they
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- amongst
себѣ -- pronoun; locative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- themselves
поищемъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <искати, -штѫ, -штєши> seek, search for -- Let us seek # This could be translated simply as a present with a future sense: "We will seek...". But we frequently find in Old Russian a use of the present tense where an imperative might be expected. Morphologically, the imperative form of this class would generally show a thematic -и-: поищимъ.
собѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- for ourselves
князя -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- a prince # Note the use of the genitive case for a male, human direct object
иже -- relative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <ижє> who, which -- who
бы -- verb; 3rd person singular conditional-optative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- would
володѣлъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <владѣти, -дѣѭ, -дѣѥши> (freq. w. instr.) rule, rule over, hold power (over) -- lead
нами -- pronoun; instrumental plural of <азъ> I -- us
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
судилъ -- verb; past participle <сѫдити, -ждѫ, -диши> judge, adjudicate -- judge
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- according to
праву -- adjective used as substantive; neuter dative singular of <правъ> just, right, proper -- the law

8 - И идоша за море къ варягомъ, к русꙇ; сице бо тꙇи звахуся варязи русь, яко се друзии зовутся свие, друзии же урмане, анъгляне, друзии гъте, тако и си.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
идоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- they went
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- across
море -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <мор҄є> sea -- the sea
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
варягомъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- the Varangians
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
русꙇ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <рѹсь> (collective) the Rus, Rus' (a Scandinavian tribe); the land of the Rus, Russia -- the Rus
сице -- adverb; <сицє> thus, so -- in this way
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
тꙇи -- demonstrative adjective; masculine nominative plural of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- those
звахуся -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <звати, зовѫ, зовєши> cry out; call, summon + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- are called
варязи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- Varangians
русь -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <рѹсь> (collective) the Rus, Rus' (a Scandinavian tribe); the land of the Rus, Russia -- Rus
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
се -- adverb; <сє> lo, behold -- ...
друзии -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѹгъ> other -- others
зовутся -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <звати, зовѫ, зовєши> cry out; call, summon + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- are called
свие -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <свийнъ> Swedish, of Sweden (a Scandinavian tribe) -- Swedes
друзии -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѹгъ> other -- others
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- and still
урмане -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <нѹрманє> (pl.) the Normans, the Northmen, the Norse, Norwegians (a Scandinavian tribe) -- Normans
анъгляне -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <аглянє, анъглянє> (pl.) the Angles (a Western Germanic tribe) -- Angles
друзии -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѹгъ> other -- (and) others
гъте -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <готинъ> Goth, Gothic, of the Goths (likely the inhabitants of Gotland, not the East Germanic tribe) -- Goths
тако -- adverb; <тако> thus, in this way -- so
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- also
си -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- these ones

9 - Рѣша руси чюдь, и словѣни, и кривичи и вси, "земля наша велика и обилна, а наряда в ней нѣтъ; да и поидѣте княжитъ и володѣти нами".
 Collapse All
Рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
руси -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <рѹсь> (collective) the Rus, Rus' (a Scandinavian tribe); the land of the Rus, Russia -- to the Rus
чюдь -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <чюдь> (collective) the Chuds (a Finnish tribe, in Estonia near Lake Peipus) -- the Chuds
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
словѣни -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <словѣнинъ> Slovene, of the Slovene tribe (located on Lake Ilmen near Novgorod) -- Slovenes
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
кривичи -- noun; masculine nominative plural <кривичи> (pl.) the Krivitchians (a Slavic tribe) -- Krivitchians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
вси -- proper noun; masculine nominative plural of <весь> (collective) the Ves, Vepsians (a Finnish tribe between Lakes Ladoga and Belo-ozero) -- Ves
земля -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- land
наша -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- Our
велика -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- great
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
обилна -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <обильнъ> copious, abundant, large -- abundant
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
наряда -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <нарѧдъ> order -- order
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
ней -- pronoun; feminine locative singular of <*и> he -- it
нѣтъ -- adverb; <нє> not + verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there is no
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- ...
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
поидѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- come
княжитъ -- verb; supine of <кнѧжити, -жѫ, -жиши> rule, be king, have power -- to rule # The supine is essentially a frozen accusative of a verbal noun.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
володѣти -- verb; infinitive of <владѣти, -дѣѭ, -дѣѥши> (freq. w. instr.) rule, rule over, hold power (over) -- hold sway # Note the construction employing a supine and an infinitive in parallel
нами -- pronoun; instrumental plural of <азъ> I -- over us

Lesson Text
1 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ з. 2 - Имаху дань варязи изъ заморья на чюди и на словѣнехъ, на мери и на всѣхъ, и на кривичѣхъ; а козари имаху на полянѣхъ, и на северѣхъ, и на вятичѣхъ, имаху по бѣлѣй вѣверицѣ отъ дыма.

3 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ и.

4 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. ѯ ѳ.

5 - В лѣто ,ѕ. т. о. 6 - Изъгнаша варяги за море, и не даша имъ дани, и почаша сами в собѣ володѣти, и не бѣ в нихъ правды, и въста родъ на родъ, и быша в нихъ усобицѣ, и воевати почаша сами на ся. 7 - И рѣша сами в себѣ, "поищемъ собѣ князя, иже бы володѣлъ нами и судилъ по праву". 8 - И идоша за море къ варягомъ, к русꙇ; сице бо тꙇи звахуся варязи русь, яко се друзии зовутся свие, друзии же урмане, анъгляне, друзии гъте, тако и си. 9 - Рѣша руси чюдь, и словѣни, и кривичи и вси, "земля наша велика и обилна, а наряда в ней нѣтъ; да и поидѣте княжитъ и володѣти нами".
Translation
1 In the year 6367. 2 The Varangians received tribute from across the sea among the Chuds and among the Slovenes, among the Merians and among the Ves, and among the Krivitchians. But the Khazars received (tribute) among the Polianians, and among the Severians, and among the Vjatichi, they received a white squirrel (pelt) from (each) hearth.
3 In the year 6368.
4 In the year 6369.
5 In the year 6370. 6 They drove the Varangians across the sea, and they did not give them tribute, and they began to rule amongst themselves. And among them there was no peace, and clan rose against clan, and there was discord among them, and they began to wage war against one another. 7 And they spoke amongst themselves: "Let us seek a prince for ourselves, who would lead us and judge according to the law." 8 And they went across the sea to the Varangians, to the Rus; for in this way those Varangians are called Rus, as others are called Swedes, and still others Normans, Angles, and others Goths, so also these ones. 9 And the Chuds, and Slovenes, and Krivitchians, and Ves said to the Rus: "Our land is great and abundant, but there is no order in it; come to rule and hold sway over us."
Grammar
1 Alphabet
The history of Slavic alphabets provides ample evidence for scholarly disputes. The principal dispute surrounds the priority of the two alphabets encountered in the earliest documents: Glagolitic and Cyrillic. The latter bears the name of the missionary Constantine, later St. Cyril, who in roughly 863 AD with the assistance of his brother St. Methodius gave the Slavic tribes their first distinct alphabet. This he did in a mission to the South Slavic tribes at a time when Slavic dialects were still sufficiently indistinct that the Old Church Slavonic language into which Cyril translated the New Testament could be understood by other Slavs, and the alphabet served to represent the sounds of a large number of Slavic dialects.

The perennial question is, Which came first, Glagolitic or Cyrillic? Though the latter name honors Cyril's signal achievement, the general scholarly consensus is that Cyril himself created the Glagolitic alphabet. Its stark difference from the traditional "holy" alphabets of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin served to cement the view in the Byzantine Church that Slavic was indeed a truly distinct tongue meriting preaching of the Gospel in the indigenous language. Only later, goes the theory, was the alphabet revised into a simplified form easier for missionaries acquainted with Greek to pick up. This simplified form has come down to us as the Cyrillic alphabet.

Nevertheless, early texts provide us with enigmatic clues suggesting that the true order of creation of the alphabets might have been the reverse. In fact a short passage in one description of St. Cyril's acts suggests that he found the model for his alphabet in some "Russian letters" that he encountered during a mission to the Crimea which predated his mission to the Slavs.

 	 	Обрѣтє жє тѹ єваггєлиє и ѱалтыри рѹсьскыми писмєны писано, и чловѣка ѡбрѣтъ глаголюща тою бєсѣдою, и бєсѣдова с нимъ, и силѹ рѣчи прꙇимъ, своєи бєсѣдѣ прикладаа различнаа писмєна, гласнаа съгласнаа, и къ богѹ молитвѹ творѧ, въскорѣ начѧтъ чєсти и сказати, и мноѕи сѧ ємѹ дивлѧхѹ, бога хвалѧщє.
 	 	And he found there the evangel and the psalter written with Russian letters, and having found a man who spoke this tongue, he conversed with him, and appreciated the power of the idiom. He adapted to his own tongue the various letters, each fitted to the sounds; and offering a prayer to the Lord he quickly began to honor Him, and many marveled at this man and praised the Lord. (Sokolsky, 1966)
It remains unclear how exactly to interpret a phrase such as "Russian letters" in an era predating the creation of the Slavic alphabet, though many have taken it to mean something akin to the symbols of the Cyrillic alphabet.

Such mysteries notwithstanding, Cyrillic is by far the commonest alphabet encountered among the texts of the Old Russian period. These lessons will therefore employ Cyrillic exclusively. As we will also see in these lessons, the East Slavic dialect, of which Russian is a member, maintains certain phonological characteristics which set it apart from the South Slavic dialect, to which Old Church Slavonic belongs. Even so, the historical and cultural importance of Old Church Slavonic exerted a heavy influence both on the literary styles and on the orthography of Russian for much of its early history. The reader must therefore be able to read certain of the letters of Old Church Slavonic even though they do not represent sounds native to Old Russian.

The following chart lists the letters of the Old Church Slavonic alphabet, together with their roman transliteration and approximate pronunciation. Early Slavic texts also employed the letters as numerals, and so the chart lists the equivalent numeric value of each letter.

Letter	 	Number	 	Name	 	Transliteration	 	Pronunciation
А а	 	1	 	азъ	 	A a	 	a as in 'father'
Б б	 	-	 	бѹкꙑ	 	B b	 	b as in 'boy'
В в	 	2	 	вѣдѣ	 	V v	 	v as in 'vine'
Г г	 	3	 	глаголи	 	G g	 	g as in 'good'
Д д	 	4	 	добро	 	D d	 	d as in 'dog'
Е є	 	5	 	єсть	 	E e	 	e as in 'end'
Ж ж	 	-	 	живѣтє	 	Ž ž	 	s as in 'pleasure'
Ѕ ѕ	 	6	 	ѕѣло	 	Dz dz	 	ds as in 'heads'
З з	 	7	 	зємл҄ꙗ	 	Z z	 	z as in 'zebra'
Ꙇ ꙇ	 	10	 	ижє	 	I i	 	ee as in 'feet'
И и	 	8	 	ижєи	 	I i	 	ee as in 'feet'
(Ћ ћ)	 	-	 	ћа, дѥрв	 	G' g'	 	g as in 'coagulate'
К к	 	20	 	како	 	K k	 	c as in 'coop'
Л л	 	30	 	людиѥ	 	L l	 	l as in 'elk'
М м	 	40	 	мꙑслитє	 	M m	 	m as in 'mother'
Н н	 	50	 	нашь	 	N n	 	n as in 'not'
О о	 	70	 	онъ	 	O o	 	ou as in 'ought'
П п	 	80	 	покой	 	P p	 	p as in 'post'
Р р	 	100	 	рьци	 	R r	 	r as in 'rather', but trilled
С с	 	200	 	слово	 	S s	 	s as in 'song'
Т т	 	300	 	тврьдо	 	T t	 	t as in 'top'
Ѹ ѹ	 	400	 	ѹкъ	 	U u	 	oo as in 'food'
Ф ф	 	500	 	фрьтъ	 	F f	 	f as in 'father'
Ѳ ѳ	 	9	 	фита	 	Θ θ	 	t as in 'top', or th as in 'path', or f as in 'father'
Х х	 	600	 	хѣръ	 	X x	 	ch as in Scots English 'loch'
Ѡ ѡ	 	800	 	отъ	 	Ō ō	 	au as in 'caught'
Щ щ	 	-	 	ща	 	Šč šč	 	sh ch as in 'English cheese'
Ц ц	 	900	 	ци	 	C c	 	ts as in 'hats'
Ч ч	 	90	 	чрьвь, ча	 	Č č	 	ch as in 'church'
Ш ш	 	-	 	ша	 	Š š	 	sh as in 'sharp'
Ъ ъ	 	-	 	ѥръ	 	Ŭ ŭ	 	u as in 'put'
Ꙑ ꙑ	 	-	 	ѥрꙑ	 	Y y	 	oo of 'foot' with the tongue, with lips as in ee of 'feet'; compare Bronx pronunciation of 'Spuyten Duyvil'
Ь ь	 	-	 	ѥрь	 	Ĭ ĭ	 	i as in 'stop it!'
Ѣ ѣ	 	-	 	ꙗть	 	Ě ě	 	ya as in 'yam'
Ю ю	 	-	 	ю	 	Ju ju	 	you as in 'you'
Ꙗ ꙗ	 	-	 	ꙗ	 	Ja ja	 	ya as in 'yacht'
Ѧ ѧ	 	900	 	юсъ, ѧсъ	 	Ę ę	 	in as in French 'fin', similar to an in American English 'can't' when final t is not fully articulated (a glottal stop)
Ѫ ѫ	 	-	 	юсъ, ѫсъ	 	Ǫ ǫ	 	on as in French 'bon'
Ѩ ѩ	 	-	 	юсъ, ѩсъ	 	Ję ję	 	ien as in French 'bien'
Ѭ ѭ	 	-	 	юсъ, ѭсъ	 	Jǫ jǫ	 	ion as in French 'lion'
Ѯ ѯ	 	60	 	ѯи	 	Ks ks	 	x as in 'tax'
Ѱ ѱ	 	700	 	ѱи	 	Ps ps	 	ps as in 'taps'
Ѵ ѵ	 	400	 	ижица	 	Ü ü	 	i in English 'ship', or u in French 'tu', ue in German 'Muenchen'
In addition to the above characters, we find the following characters in Old Russian texts.

Letter	 	Number	 	Name	 	Transliteration	 	Pronunciation
Й й	 	-	 	и краткоє	 	Ji ji	 	y as in 'yes' or 'boy'
Я я	 	-	 	ꙗть	 	Ja ja	 	ya as in 'yacht'
У у	 	400	 	у	 	U u	 	oo as in 'food'
Ы ы	 	-	 	ѥры	 	Y y	 	oo of 'foot' with the tongue, with lips as in ee of 'feet'; compare Bronx pronunciation of 'Spuyten Duyvil'
For the most part these symbols derived later than the original Cyrillic version of the alphabet employed in Old Church Slavonic and the earliest Old Russian. The symbol у is clearly a simplification of the OCS digraph ѹ. And я developed from the later cursive form of ѧ, which had lost its nasal quality in the dialects of East Slavic, in particular in Old Russian. Its name derives from the fact that it frequently alternated with ѣ. The symbol й seems only to make a noteworthy appearance from the 16th century onwards. But ы had already been a variant spelling of ꙑ encountered in certain remnants of OCS itself.

The sound represented by English y in 'yes' plays a pivotal role in the Slavic phonetic inventory, making its absence in the above alphabet all the more conspicuous. In Slavic linguistics this sound is typically represented in transcription by the symbol j. This symbol is often referred to as yod or jot, which latter might be written more clearly to the English speaker as 'yote', and rhymes with the word 'boat'. When preceding certain vowels we often find in Cyrillic ligatures comprised of the simple vowel preceded by what looks like a roman capital I or a Greek iota: ꙗ, ѥ, ю, ѩ, ѭ. In Old Russian we also find я, whose pronunciation amounts to а preceded by yod. There was no marking of yod preceding и, and marking of yod before є was inconsistent. When it followed a consonant, texts occasionally employed the symbol ҄ to indicate its presence:

Palatalized	 	 	 	 
Б҄ б҄	 	B' b'	 	b as in 'beauty'
К҄ к҄	 	K' k'	 	c as in 'cute'
Л҄ л҄	 	L' l'	 	ll as in 'William'
Н҄ н҄	 	N' n'	 	ni as in 'onion'
П҄ п҄	 	P' p'	 	p as in 'computer'
Р҄ р҄	 	R' r'	 	re as in 'are you', but trilled
Х҄ х҄	 	X' x'	 	ch y as in 'Is this the loch you mentioned?'
The so-called jers (rhyming with 'wears', but with w replaced by y) -- ь and ъ -- were reduced vowels. Having a generally weak articulation, they were often omitted in manuscripts. One often finds the symbol ҄ where a jer might be expected: ч҄то for чьто.

2 Sound System
We may organize the phonemes of Old Russian in a table by placing them according to their type and primary point of articulation. The letters in parentheses are not separate phonemes, but rather palatalized consonants consisting of the original consonant followed by a yod, i.e. by a palatal off-glide.

 	 	Labial	 	Dental	 	Palatal(ized)	 	Retracted	 	Velar
Stops	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
voiceless	 	п	 	т	 	(п҄, к҄, х҄)	 	 	 	к
voiced	 	б	 	д	 	(б҄)	 	 	 	г
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nasals	 	м	 	н	 	н҄	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Fricatives	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
voiceless	 	ф	 	с	 	(с)	 	ш	 	х
voiced	 	в	 	з	 	(з)	 	ж	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Affricates	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
voiceless	 	 	 	ц	 	щ	 	ч	 	 
voiced	 	 	 	 	 	жд	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Apical Trill	 	 	 	р	 	р҄	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Lateral	 	 	 	л	 	л҄	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resonant	 	 	 	 	 	j	 	 	 	 
We may likewise display the vowels, organizing them according how high or low the tongue is in the mouth and according to how far forward or back the tongue is pushed during articulation. Under such a scheme, we find the following structure for the vocalic system.

 	 	Front	 	 	 	 	 	Central	 	 	 	Back	 	 
High	 	и	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	ы	 	у
 	 	 	 	ь	 	 	 	ъ	 	 	 	 	 	 
Middle	 	 	 	 	 	є	 	 	 	о	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Low	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	а	 	 	 	 	 	 
The Old Russian sound system largely resembles that of Old Church Slavonic. But there are some notable exceptions:

Affricates: While the Old Church Slavonic pronunciation of ѕ was as the dz in English 'adze', the Old Russian pronunciation seems to have been similar to that of English z, and we find alternation between ѕ and з.
Clusters: The Proto-Indo-European sequence *sk underwent palatalization before front vowels to yield *sk- > s'k'- > šč-. (An asterisk denotes a reconstructed or unattested form.) In Old Church Slavonic this further shifted according to šč > štč > št. In OCS the letter щ represents this combination št; in Old Russian щ represents the original palatalized sequence šč.
Jat: The exact pronunciation of ѣ is unclear in Old Russian, and we often find ꙗ or я, or even є, where one would expect to find ѣ in Old Church Slavonic. Some scholars suggest a pronunciation approaching the a in the American English pronunciation of cat.
Nasalization: Old Russian distinguishes itself from Old Church Slavonic in part by its lack of nasalized vowels. The letters ѧ and ѫ in Old Russian owe their occurrence largely to the heavy influence of Old Church Slavonic literature and spelling conventions. Typically we find ѣ or я in Old Russian where Old Church Slavonic would have ѧ; and Old Russian shows ѹ or у where OCS has ѫ. The same holds for the corresponding letters denoting a palatal on-glide, e.g. OR ю where we find OCS ѭ.
Slavic languages in general, and Old Russian in particular, make an important distinction between "hard" and "soft" consonants. One can not sensibly discuss these distinctions without also discussing "palatal" or "palatalized" consonants, and it is here that scholarship makes what is a very simple concept into something altogether unintelligible. The present description will attempt to steer a middle course through terminology that is often defined differently by different authors. With this caveat, we distinguish the following concepts:

Soft Consonants: we call a consonant soft if it is followed by a front vowel;
Hard Consonants: we call a consonant hard if it is followed by a back vowel;
Palatalized: we say a consonant is palatalized if it is followed by yod.
The difficulty arises in part due to the confusion between palatal and palatalized consonants. A palatal consonant is simply a consonant whose point of articulation is the hard palate of the mouth. English ch in 'church' and j in 'jiffy' are palatal consonants in this sense. By contrast, the c in English 'cute' (pronounced as if written 'kyoot') is palatalized, i.e. it is a velar k-sound followed by the yod-sound.

The reason for the confusion stems from the fact that, as a language evolves over time, palatalized consonants have the tendency to mutate into palatal consonants, and likewise soft consonants tend to mutate into palatal consonants. Moreover if, for example, a soft consonant changes into a palatal consonant, then the resulting palatal consonant will likewise find itself before a front vowel, and we may thus call the resulting palatal consonant soft as well. This process is not unique to Slavic: in Germanic, we find Old Norse skip maintains the velar pronunciation of the k before i; but in Old English scip already we find the cluster sk has palatalized before the front vowel, a feature reflected in the modern pronunciation 'ship'. In the resulting form, the sh still precedes the front vowel that conditioned the original mutation.

In Old Russian, as in Old Church Slavonic, a labial consonant is accompanied by an epenthetic l when palatalized. For example, the sequence b + j results in blj. The following chart provides some examples of a given consonant in hard, soft, and palatalized contexts.

Consonant	 	Hard	 	Soft	 	Palatalized
[m]	 	имати [imati]	 	имєть [imetĭ]	 	ѥмл҄ю [jemlju]
[s]	 	пьсати [pĭsati]	 	письць [pisĭcĭ]	 	пишю [pišju < *pis-jǫ]
[b]	 	быти [byti]	 	любити [ljubiti]	 	люблю [ljublju < *ljub-jǫ]
[d]	 	родъ [rodŭ]	 	родити [roditi]	 	рожю [rožju < *rod-jǫ]
As mentioned above, there is no specific character representing the yod. Though there are numerous ioticized ligatures, such as ю above, texts do not always distinguish clearly between vowels with a preceding yod and those without. Thus the reader should consider alternations such as вижю 'I see' vs. видиши 'you see' to determine the presence of yod.

3 Twofold Declension
Old Russian, like Old Church Slavonic and Modern Russian, is an inflected language. In particular nouns display their grammatical role in an utterance by means of changes to the endings of the word. English, inasmuch as it is linguistically related to Old Russian, shows the same system of denoting grammatical function, though in greatly reduced form: for example, 's added to a noun denotes possession or relation, as in Jill's book or gold's luster. In English we may rephrase such expressions using prepositions: the book of Jill or the luster of gold. Old Russian also employs prepositions, but in many instances they are unnecessary because the ending of the word is sufficient for the task. Moreover, Old Russian employs many different endings for different shades of meaning, whereas English employs only a handful and for other shades of meaning requires prepositions.

Old Russian nouns display three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter. These are grammatical genders, not natural genders. In general when a noun denotes an animal or person that is masculine, the noun too has the masculine grammatical gender; similarly for feminine beings and feminine nouns. Nouns denoting inanimate things or concepts may be neuter, but they may just as well take either of the other genders. For example, городъ 'city' is masculine, съмьрть 'death' is feminine, and вєрємя 'time' is neuter. In addition, Old Russian nouns show inflection for three numbers: singular, dual, and plural. The singular number denotes one of a thing, the plural denotes more than one, and the dual specifically denotes two. For example, in the nominative case рука denotes '(one) hand', рукы denotes 'hands', and рукѣ specifically denotes 'two hands'.

Old Russian inflects nouns in seven cases: nominative, accusative, genitive, locative, dative, instrumental, and vocative. Since each case may have a unique ending for singular, dual, or plural, this implies that each noun can potentially have twenty-one distinct forms. In practice, many cases have the same endings in the dual, and the nominative and vocative are always identical in the plural. This greatly reduces the number, and in several inflection paradigms the number is reduced even further. Each case denotes a specific grammatical role. The nominative marks the grammatical subject of the clause. The accusative denotes the direct object of the verb, or it may denote motion along a line or surface, or the destination of motion. The genitive in its simplest interpretation denotes possession; but the case is broad enough that it may denote a more general relationship or quality. The locative marks a stationary location, either temporal or physical, in or at which an event occurs. The dative case denotes the indirect object in a clause, or more generally a person or thing with an interest in the action or with reference to whom the action takes place. The instrumental denotes the means by which an action is performed, or it may denote accompaniment. The vocative is the case of direct address. In English, aside from the 's or s' of the genitive or the oblique case of pronouns, each of these roles is marked through the use of prepositions. The following chart outlines the cases of Old Russian, their basic senses, a preposition or prepositions in English that elicit the approximate sense, and an example in Old Russian.

Case Name	 	Description of Use	 	Basic Preposition	 	Example	 	Sense
Nominative	 	case of the subject, or something predicated to the subject	 	(none)	 	городъ	 	'(a/the) city' (as subject)
Accusative	 	case of the direct object, or of the destination of directed motion	 	(none); toward	 	городъ	 	'(a/the) city' (as object)
Genitive	 	case of the sphere of relation; possession; (masculine direct object)	 	of; (none)	 	города	 	'of (a/the) city'
Locative	 	case of the location in space or time	 	in, on, at	 	городѣ	 	'in (a/the) city'
Dative	 	case of the indirect object; person or thing affected by the action	 	to, for	 	городу	 	'for (a/the) city'
Instrumental	 	case of the instrument of an action; case of accompaniment	 	with, by	 	городомь	 	'with (a/the) city'
Vocative	 	case of direct address	 	o!	 	городє	 	'O City!'
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
3.1 o, jo-Stem Nouns
The commonest pattern of noun declension encountered in Old Russian is that of the o- or jo-declension, termed by many authors the twofold nominal declension. The designation of the declension derives from the stem vowel preceding the ending. In some sense this is a theoretical construct: for the most part the endings that are appended to the stem vowel in declining nouns have so melded with the stem vowel itself that the latter is difficult to discern without recourse to the underlying historical phonetics. Nevertheless we maintain the terminology for two major reasons: first, it aligns with more general scholarly terminology; second, the declension type is more readily identifiable in Indo-European terms and able to be linked to related declensions in other languages, e.g. Latin and Greek, where the o-declension conforms more noticeably to its name. Within Old Russian a useful rule of thumb is that the stem vowel appears directly after the nominal root in the dative plural. For example the dative plural of городъ 'city' is город-о-мъ, and here we find the -о- of the o-declension before the ending -мъ. This rule of thumb holds for all but the consonant declensions, to be discussed later.

While many nouns in Proto-Indo-European, and later Common Slavic, appended *-o- to the nominal root, others appended *-jo-. This yod incurred a palatalization, or softening, of the preceding consonant within Common Slavic. It also left effects on the nominal endings themselves. We thus have two slightly different declension types for o- and jo-stem nouns, often called hard and soft declensions, respectively.

The paradigms of городъ 'city' and чєловѣкъ 'man, human' illustrate the twofold declension of masculine hard stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	городъ	 	города	 	городи	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣкъ	 	чєловѣка	 	чєловѣци
A	 	городъ	 	города	 	городы	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣкъ	 	чєловѣка	 	чєловѣкы
G	 	города	 	городу	 	городъ	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣка	 	чєловѣку	 	чєловѣкъ
L	 	городѣ	 	городу	 	городѣхъ	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣцѣ	 	чєловѣку	 	чєловѣцѣхъ
D	 	городу	 	городома	 	городомъ	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣку	 	чєловѣкома	 	чєловѣкомъ
I	 	городомь	 	городома	 	городы	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣкомь	 	чєловѣкома	 	чєловѣкы
V	 	городє	 	города	 	городи	 	 	 	 	 	чєловѣчє	 	чєловѣка	 	чєловѣци
Note the changes of the final velar consonant in the paradigm of чєловѣкъ. In particular we find a change of к to ч in the vocative singular and of к to ц in the locative singular and nominative, vocative, and locative plural. These changes result from the first and second palatalization, respectively, which we will discuss in greater detail in the next lesson.

Old Russian мужь 'man, husband' and змьи 'serpent, dragon' illustrate the declensions of masculine soft stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	мужь	 	мужя	 	мужи	 	 	 	 	 	змьи	 	змья	 	змьи
A	 	мужь	 	мужя	 	мужѣ	 	 	 	 	 	змьи	 	змья	 	змьѣ
G	 	мужя	 	мужю	 	мужь	 	 	 	 	 	змья	 	змью	 	змьи
L	 	мужи	 	мужю	 	мужихъ	 	 	 	 	 	змьи	 	змью	 	змьихъ
D	 	мужю	 	мужєма	 	мужємъ	 	 	 	 	 	змью	 	змьѥма	 	змьѥмъ
I	 	мужємь	 	мужєма	 	мужи	 	 	 	 	 	змьѥмь	 	змьѥма	 	змьи
V	 	мужю	 	мужя	 	мужи	 	 	 	 	 	змью	 	змья	 	змьи
Note in the above paradigms that we see, for instance, in the nominative singular -ь the fronted counterpart to the ending -ъ from the hard stems. Moreover we see the remnants of the -j- of the jo-stem in the iotated forms of endings such as the dative singular -ю. In the paradigm of змьи we find an important example of the general tendency in Old Russian to write etymological *-jĭ-, for which there was no special symbol, as -и-. For example, the underlying phonemic representation of the genitive plural змьи is /zmĭjĭ/, showing that the underlying genitive plural ending is the same as that for the genitive plural мужь. Moreover, since the front jer -ь- of this word's stem precedes the yod -j-, it falls in tense position and may alternately be written -и-: e.g. nominative singular змии or dative singular змию. We will discuss tense position of jers in the next lesson.

The neuter paradigms for the twofold declension closely resemble those of the masculine nouns. The nouns мѣсто 'place' and иго 'yoke' provide examples of the paradigms for neuter hard stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	мѣсто	 	мѣстѣ	 	мѣста	 	 	 	 	 	иго	 	изѣ	 	ига
A	 	мѣсто	 	мѣстѣ	 	мѣста	 	 	 	 	 	иго	 	изѣ	 	ига
G	 	мѣста	 	мѣсту	 	мѣстъ	 	 	 	 	 	ига	 	игу	 	игъ
L	 	мѣстѣ	 	мѣсту	 	мѣстѣхъ	 	 	 	 	 	изѣ	 	игу	 	изѣхъ
D	 	мѣсту	 	мѣстома	 	мѣстомъ	 	 	 	 	 	игу	 	игома	 	игомъ
I	 	мѣстомь	 	мѣстома	 	мѣсты	 	 	 	 	 	игомь	 	игома	 	игы
V	 	мѣсто	 	мѣстѣ	 	мѣста	 	 	 	 	 	иго	 	изѣ	 	ига
In the neuter paradigm note the agreement of the forms for the nominative and accusative of all numbers. This holds true for all neuter nouns, not only those that decline according to the twofold pattern. We also encounter again the effects of the second palatalization in forms such as the locative singular изѣ, where the final -г- of the stem has palatalized to -з-.

The Old Russian nouns сьрдьцє 'heart' and знамєньѥ 'sign, mark' serve to illustrate the forms of the neuter soft stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	сьрдьцє	 	сьрдьци	 	сьрдьца	 	 	 	 	 	знамєньѥ	 	знамєньи	 	знамєнья
A	 	сьрдьцє	 	сьрдьци	 	сьрдьца	 	 	 	 	 	знамєньѥ	 	знамєньи	 	знамєнья
G	 	сьрдьца	 	сьрдьцу	 	сьрдьць	 	 	 	 	 	знамєнья	 	знамєнью	 	знамєньи
L	 	сьрдьци	 	сьрдьцу	 	сьрдьцихъ	 	 	 	 	 	знамєньи	 	знамєнью	 	знамєньихъ
D	 	сьрдьцу	 	сьрдьцєма	 	сьрдьцємъ	 	 	 	 	 	знамєнью	 	знамєньѥма	 	знамєньѥмъ
I	 	сьрдьцємь	 	сьрдьцєма	 	сьрдьци	 	 	 	 	 	знамєньѥмь	 	знамєньѥма	 	знамєньи
V	 	сьрдьцє	 	сьрдьци	 	сьрдьца	 	 	 	 	 	знамєньѥ	 	знамєньи	 	знамєнья
As with the masculine soft stems, we see that the endings of the neuter soft stems show the fronted version of the corresponding hard ending. Moreover in знамєньѥ we find the tendency to write -jĭ- as -и-, for example in the genitive plural ending знамєньи [znamenĭjĭ]. We also note that the stem-final front jer -ь- is tense, so that we find alternate forms знамєниѥ, знамєния, and so on.

3.2 a, ja-Stem Nouns
The a- and ja-stem declensions also provide one of the commonest noun types alongside the o- and jo-stem nouns. As a general rule of thumb, the a- and ja-stems are feminine nouns; however some nouns that refer to male beings are grammatically masculine. For example жєна 'woman' and нога 'foot' are both feminine; but владꙑка 'ruler' is masculine, even though it is an a-stem noun.

The a- and ja-declensions also betoken their Indo-European forbears: a-stem nouns run rife through languages such as Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit. In Old Russian the -a of this declension appears not only in the dative plural, but in the nominative singular as well. However there are a few nouns of the ja-declension, such as боярыни 'wife of a boyar' and пустыни 'wilderness', with nominative singular in -i rather than -ja. Even with these nouns, there seems to have been a tendency to shift back to forms more recognizably derived from the ja-declension, and so we also find nominative singulars боярыня and пустыня, respectively. Note that the new forms maintain the yod. As with the o- and jo-stems, the a- and ja-stems are termed hard and soft, respectively, and the yod of the latter shows the tendency to palatalize preceding consonants.

The forms of жєна 'woman' and нога 'foot', both feminine, serve to illustrate the paradigms of the hard stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	жєна	 	жєнѣ	 	жєны	 	 	 	 	 	нога	 	нозѣ	 	ногы
A	 	жєну	 	жєнѣ	 	жєны	 	 	 	 	 	ногу	 	нозѣ	 	ногы
G	 	жєны	 	жєну	 	жєнъ	 	 	 	 	 	ногы	 	ногу	 	ногъ
L	 	жєнѣ	 	жєну	 	жєнахъ	 	 	 	 	 	нозѣ	 	ногу	 	ногахъ
D	 	жєнѣ	 	жєнама	 	жєнамъ	 	 	 	 	 	нозѣ	 	ногама	 	ногамъ
I	 	жєною	 	жєнама	 	жєнами	 	 	 	 	 	ногою	 	ногама	 	ногами
V	 	жєно	 	жєнѣ	 	жєнꙑ	 	 	 	 	 	ного	 	нозѣ	 	ногы
Note that here too we encounter the effects of second palatalization before the ending -ѣ, changing the -г- to -з-.

The nouns зємл҄я 'earth' (feminine) and судьи 'judge' (masculine) serve to illustrate the soft stem paradigms.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	зємл҄я	 	зємл҄и	 	зємл҄ѣ	 	 	 	 	 	судьи	 	судьи	 	судьѣ
A	 	зємл҄ю	 	зємл҄и	 	зємл҄ѣ	 	 	 	 	 	судью	 	судьи	 	судьѣ
G	 	зємл҄ѣ	 	зємл҄ю	 	зємл҄ь	 	 	 	 	 	судьѣ	 	судью	 	судьи
L	 	зємл҄и	 	зємл҄ю	 	зємл҄яхъ	 	 	 	 	 	судьи	 	судью	 	судьяхъ
D	 	зємл҄и	 	зємл҄яма	 	зємл҄ямъ	 	 	 	 	 	судьи	 	судьяма	 	судьямъ
I	 	зємл҄єю	 	зємл҄яма	 	зємл҄ями	 	 	 	 	 	судьѥю	 	судьяма	 	судьями
V	 	зємл҄є	 	зємл҄и	 	зємл҄ѣ	 	 	 	 	 	судьи	 	судьи	 	судьѣ
As with the front jer -ь- in змьи, the front jer in судьи is tense. We therefore find fully vocalized forms судии, судию, etc., alongside those listed above.

4 Verb Inflection
Old Russian inflects verbs to show person and number. This is similar to English, which changes the final sounds of the verb have, for example, to agree with the subject: I have, thou hast, she has, etc. In addition to distinguishing between singular and plural subjects, as between English she has and they have, Old Russian also distinguishes the dual number: e.g. there are distinct forms for the equivalents of each of English I have, we have, and we (two) have. The language distinguishes three simple tenses -- present, imperfect, and aorist -- where verbal inflection is confined to one word alone. The compound tenses -- perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect -- are all formed by combination of an inflected verb form with a separate participle. This parallels English formations such as the perfect, where a verb like take has a perfect form composed of two parts: has taken.

Common Slavic inherited from Proto-Indo-European a tripartite system of verbal construction. Specifically, each verb form can be broken down into three basic parts: root, suffix, and ending. The root comprises the meaning-bearing unit of the word. In practical terms, it holds the content which we seek when looking up the word in the dictionary. The ending, by contrast, encapsulates all information pertaining to person and number. It tells us who (I vs. you vs. he, she, it) and how many (you vs. y'all, or I vs. we two). Finally the suffix includes any other information, in particular information regarding tense. That is, certain suffixes mark the past tenses, others the present tenses, and so on. In Old Russian, as in the rest of Indo-European, the verbal root comes first, the ending last, and the suffix in between. In certain instances there is no suffix to speak of, or no ending (we never lack a verbal root, of course). In such situations linguists say the suffix, for example, is "null" or "zero" rather than saying there is no suffix. This simply facilitates the process of description, avoiding clumsy caveats such as "the suffix, when it is present, can have the form...". As another convenient shorthand, we say that the root and suffix taken together comprise the verbal stem.

Based on this scheme of root-suffix-ending, Old Russian verbs fall into five basic categories. The categories are distinguished by the suffix found in the present tense stem. For convenience we list these verbal classes below, together with an example verb from each category.

Class	 	Suffix	 	Example	 	2nd Pers. Sg.	 	Translation
I	 	-e-	 	нєсти	 	нєс-є-ши	 	carry
II	 	-ne-	 	двинути	 	дви-нє-ши	 	move
III	 	-je-	 	знати	 	зна-ѥ-ши	 	know
IV	 	-i-	 	любити	 	люб-и-ши	 	love
V	 	-0-	 	быти	 	єс- -и	 	be
Note that the fifth class has no suffix, or rather it has a zero suffix. Moreover the third class has a suffix which includes the yod -j-. As Old Russian has no separate character to represent this sound, we must often infer its presence either from pre-iotated forms of vowels or from the palatalization which it produces in preceding consonants.

In order to begin reading texts profitably and as quickly as possible, we introduce Old Russian verbal inflection in the context of the present and imperfect tenses. These tenses show the basic mechanics involved in analyzing Old Russian verb forms. Later lessons will go into greater detail regarding the different tense formations and verb classes.

4.1 Present Tense
The present tense denotes action contemporaneous with the moment of utterance. Note that the English present tense comprises two constructions, a simple and a continuous. For example the verb jog has simple present I jog and continuous present I am jogging. In English it is clear that the latter formation, I am jogging, denotes an action that is currently in progress as the statement is being uttered. The former, I jog, by contrast need not be going on at the same instant as the utterance -- in fact, it typically does not mean that. We can say I jog on Tuesdays or I jog every day of the week, so that I jog denotes a general truth rather than a present circumstance, and it could be rephrased more clearly as I am a jogger or I am a person who jogs. Thus the English "present tense" describes two very different situations, only one of which actually talks specifically about present time.

The Old Russian present tense fulfills both these functions: it may represent an action ongoing currently (e.g. I am jogging) or it may represent an action as a general truth (e.g. I jog, i.e. I am a jogger). Where it differs from English is that one and the same verb form can have either connotation: Old Russian does not have a separate verb form for an ongoing present action. Moreover, this same present verb form in Old Russian can act as a future tense, denoting an action that will occur after the moment of utterance. This too parallels English usage of the continuous present: for example I am jogging to the store in 5 minutes. One and the same verbal form in Old Russian covers all these senses.

In truth, Old Russian shows the beginnings of a very subtle system for distinguishing some of these senses. Old Russian often distinguishes the aspect of verbs, e.g. whether an action is viewed as completed or ongoing, by means of the presence or absence of a verbal prefix. Specifically the presence of a verbal prefix on most verbs marks the action as viewed as a complete whole, encompassing beginning, middle, and end. In the past tense, an English equivalent would be I jogged. By contrast, the absence of a prefix often denotes that the action is not viewed as completed; frequently this means that there is no reference to the action's end. For example, in English I was jogging is a past tense form that does not show completion: in context, the action could continue until the present moment. This will be discussed in greater detail in a later lesson, but it is a linguistic feature important enough to be worth noting right from the beginning.

The actual formation of the Old Russian present tense proceeds by obtaining the present tense stem. We obtain the present tense stem by removing the ending (-ши) from the second person singular form of the verb. Thus if we have the verb рєщи 'to say', with second person singular рєчєши, then the present tense stem of this verb is рєчє-. Obtaining the present tense stem thus requires that one know beforehand the form of the second person singular. Some dictionaries therefore provide this as part of the entry for a given verb.

It is worth pointing out that the final element -є- in the stem рєчє- we obtained above is called the thematic vowel. This thematic vowel is a suffix that intervenes between the verbal root, here рєк-, and the ending, in this instance -ши. When the thematic vowel is a front vowel, this triggers palatalization in preceding velar consonants. Often we find that the thematic vowel is -о- or some other back vowel, particularly in the first person singular and third person plural forms, and in these positions the thematic vowel does not trigger palatalization.

We illustrate the present conjugation of verbs by providing the paradigms of two verbs: нєсти 'to carry', from Class I, and глаголати 'to say', from Class III.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	нєсу	 	нєсєвѣ	 	нєсємъ	 	 	 	 	 	глагол҄ю	 	глагол҄ѥвѣ	 	глагол҄ѥмъ
2	 	нєсєши	 	нєсєта	 	нєсєтє	 	 	 	 	 	глагол҄ѥши	 	глагол҄ѥта	 	глагол҄ѥтє
3	 	нєсєть	 	нєсєта	 	нєсуть	 	 	 	 	 	глагол҄ѥть	 	глагол҄ѥта	 	глагол҄ють
The verb нєсти has second person singular нєсєши, hence present tense stem нєсє-. The verb глаголати shows a second person singular глагол҄ѥши, and thus has present stem глагол҄ѥ-. In Old Church Slavonic the third personal dual ending -тє is frequently replaced by -та. In Old Russian the ending -та regularly appears for the third person dual.

4.2 Imperfect Tense
The imperfect tense denotes repeated or continuous action in the past. In denoting continuous past action the Old Russian imperfect most closely resembles the English continuous past, as in I was jogging. The imperfect in this sense renders an action as occurring over some span of time in the past, and it does not stipulate whether or not the action ceased before the time of utterance. In denoting repeated past action the Old Russian imperfect closely parallels the English construction used to, as in I used to jog. The imperfect in this sense connotes a series of individual actions; by virtue of their being individually isolatable, the implication is that each particular action had a definite beginning and end.

Scholarly description of the formation of the imperfect in Old Russian, as in Old Church Slavonic, presents numerous difficulties. Lunt (1980) provides perhaps the cleanest theoretical description. In these lessons, however, we will strive to achieve a pragmatic middle-ground.

The most distinctive feature of the imperfect is the tense suffix: -аа-х- in Old Russian; for comparison -ѣа-х- and -аа-х- in Old Church Slavonic. Musical notation (cf. Lunt, 1980) suggests that the suffix -аах- was indeed originally disyllabic, though it is unclear until what date such pronunciation survived in the spoken language. The first element, -а-, variously appears as -а-, -я-, -ѧ-, -ѩ-. The second element, -а-, often seems to have been contracted into the first, and so is often left unwritten. The third and last element, -х-, appears as -ш- or -с- in certain desinences.

Whereas the suffix which characterizes the imperfect remains readily identifiable, the stem to which it is attached is not so easy to predict. Most treatments of Old Russian stipulate that the imperfect suffix attaches to the infinitive-aorist stem. We find the infinitive-aorist stem by taking the infinitive, removing the infinitive marker -ти, and undoing any sound changes undergone by the stem in the process of affixing the infinitive marker. For a verb such as нєс-ти 'to carry', removal of the infinitive marker leaves нєс-, with no further adjustments. Similarly глагола-ти 'to say' yields an infinitive-aorist stem глагола-. But for вєс-ти 'to lead', we must realize that the -с- of the surface form derives from a root-final -д- that shifts to -с- before the -т- of the infinitive ending. Hence the infinitive-aorist stem for вєсти is вєд-.

Some verbs, however, do not append the imperfect suffix to the infinitive-aorist stem, but rather to the present stem. Here we should be careful to note that the stem employed is really the present stem without the thematic vowel. Thus for нєсти 'to carry', we have the second person singular нєсєши, with stem нєсє-: removing the thematic vowel, this then leaves нєс-. For двигнути 'to move' the second singular is двигнєши, so that the present stem is двигнє-: removing the thematic vowel yields двигн-.

We may now attempt to provide a pragmatic recipe for imperfect formation. We divide Old Russian verbs into two main classes, each receiving slightly different treatment (cf. Schmalstieg, 1995):

Infinitive: If removal of the infinitive suffix -ти leaves a final -а-, then the imperfect attaches the suffix to this stem, and the stem-final -а- is absorbed into the first element, -а-, of the suffix. For example, зна-ти yields the stem зна-, to which is appended the suffix to give знаах-.
Present-Stem: A large class of verbs attaches the imperfect suffix to the themeless present stem. For example, the second person singular present нєс-є-ши 'you carry' yields present stem нєс-є-, the themeless version of which is нєс-. To this we add the imperfect suffix to arrive at the imperfect stem нєс-яах-.
The reader must bear in mind, however, that Old Russian provides numerous exceptions to the rules stated above.

Continuing with the examples from the previous section, we illustrate the imperfect conjugation of verbs by providing the paradigms of нєсти 'to carry', from Class I, and глаголати 'to say', from Class III.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	нєсяахъ	 	нєсяаховѣ	 	нєсяахомъ	 	 	 	 	 	глаголаахъ	 	глаголааховѣ	 	глаголаахомъ
2	 	нєсяашє	 	нєсяашєта	 	нєсяашєтє	 	 	 	 	 	глаголаашє	 	глаголаашєта	 	глаголаашєтє
3	 	нєсяашє	 	нєсяашєта	 	нєсяаху	 	 	 	 	 	глаголаашє	 	глаголаашєта	 	глаголааху
Under the influence of the present endings, for the third person we often find forms with an additional -ть appended to the normal ending: e.g. singular нєсяашєть and глаголаашєть, plural нєсяахуть and глаголаахуть. Moreover, presumably under the influence of the aorist endings, we find alternate forms for the second and third person dual: нєсяаста and глаголааста for both second and third person.

One important exception to the above division into formation classes is that of verbs with infinitive stem in -а- which originally derives from Proto-Slavic *-ę-: for example Old Russian начати (начяти) 'to begin', compared with Old Church Slavonic начѧти. Such verbs form their imperfects according to the present-stem group.

Moreover we occasionally find that a single verb will show imperfects formed according to both groups outlined above. For example in the Primary Chronicle we find имаху дань 'they took tribute', where имаху is the third person plural imperfect built from имати 'to take' according to the infinitival paradigm outlined above. But the same phrase appears in the Igor Tale as ємляху дань 'they took tribute', where now имати takes its imperfect from the themeless present-stem construction.

5 Word Order
The study of Old Russian word order forms a highly controversial and hotly debated subdiscipline within historical studies of the Russian language. Old Russian's close linguistic relative, Old Church Slavonic, suffers from similar controversy. Within the corpus of Old Church Slavonic we find few instances of natively composed literature; instead the majority of the texts comprise biblical stories translated from Greek models. Likely owing to the similar nominal and verbal structures of the two languages, the OCS texts closely parallel their Greek exemplars. For this reason scholars have difficulty deciding whether a particular OCS passage shows the particular order of elements it does because this is a natural construction within OCS, or whether the order derives from adoring adherence to the Greek original.

In the Old Russian corpus we encounter the contrary problem. We have a wealth of natively composed literature. Much of it, however, is of an elevated style. As in English, in compositions of a highly educated register the composer tends to use constructions that frequently would not occur to a native speaker in casual conversation. And though we do have some documents, such as writings on birch bark, that very likely pertained to the everyday life of ordinary folk, these texts tend to be extremely short, often abbreviated, and of opaque interpretation. Finally, among the high literature of Old Russian we find a strong tendency, especially in the earliest phases, to emulate Old Church Slavonic. Thus we again end with the same dilemma as to whether a given construction represents a native style or an emulation of a highly regarded foreign style. Suffice it to say, the abundance of evidence in the Old Russian corpus provides ample examples to contradict any theory.

5.1 Subject & Predicate
Old Russian displays a remarkably free word order, especially in regard to the relative position of subject and predicate. The inherited tendency from its Indo-European ancestor is toward verb-final word order. Some scholars suggest that this is still the trend in Old Russian with transitive verbs: transitive verbs tend to stand at the end of their clause. The farther forward the speaker or writer places the verb, the more pronounced it becomes. A particular position of emphasis is before the subject. Consider the following example from the Primary Chronicle:

 	 	Въ сє жє лѣто	 	рєкоша	 	дружина	 	Игорєви...
 	 	And in that year	 	said	 	the retinue	 	to Igor...
meaning "And in that year the retinue said to Igor...". Here the verb рєкоша precedes its subject дружина.

Modern Russian tends to place the verb before the object when no particular emphasis is called for. We also see this tendency developing early, as in the following example:

 	 	коньчахъ	 	книжькꙑ	 	сия
 	 	I wrote	 	little book	 	this
meaning "I wrote this little book." This comes from the Svjatoslav Miscellany, dating to 1076.

5.2 Modifier & Modified
The term modifiers in the present context denotes those words which serve to restrict or qualify another word, typically a noun. Some modifiers, such as adjectives, must agree with the modified noun. Others, such as qualifying or dependent genitives, do not.

The Old Russian texts suggest that the position of adjectives relative to the noun they modified was relatively free. Old Russian adjectives come in two basic types, definite and indefinite, whose exact significance we will discuss later in these lessons. Much controversy surrounds the question of whether one or the other type tends to precede or follow the word it modifies. A definitive consensus has so far eluded scholars. We find examples where indefinite adjectives follow the noun modified, as in the following example from the Primary Chronicle:

 	 	боръ	 	вєликъ
 	 	pine forest	 	large
meaning "a large pine forest". We also find examples where the definite adjective precedes the modified noun, as in the Igor Tale:

 	 	тѹ	 	кроваваго	 	вина	 	нє	 	доста
 	 	here	 	related-to-blood	 	of wine	 	not	 	there was sufficient
meaning "Here the blood wine was insufficient." In this statement the definite adjective кроваваго precedes the noun вина which it modifies. However we find definite adjectives preceding and following the nouns they modify in parallel phrases with no apparent difference in meaning. For example we find

 	 	съ	 	Дону	 	вєликаго
 	 	from	 	Don	 	great
in the Igor Tale alongside

 	 	отъ	 	вєликаго	 	Дону
 	 	from	 	great	 	Don
both meaning "from the great Don" with no readily discernable distinction.

Possessive pronouns and adjectives both show a more distinct tendency to follow the noun which they modify. The following example, from the Primary Chronicle, illustrates:

 	 	Поимѣмъ	 	жєну	 	єго	 	за	 	князь	 	свои	 	Малъ
 	 	Let us take	 	wife	 	his	 	for	 	prince	 	our	 	Mal
meaning "Let us take his wife for our prince, Mal." Here the possessive pronoun єго follows the noun жєну which it qualifies, and likewise the possessive adjective свои follows the noun князь which it modifies. By contrast, the demonstrative pronominal adjective tends to precede the word it modifies:

 	 	до	 	сєго	 	дьнє
 	 	until	 	this	 	day
meaning "up to this very day". Here the proximal deictic сєго precedes the noun дьнє which it modifies.

5.3 Enclitics
Enclitics are words which carry no stress of their own. Typically they are preceded by a stressed word. In Old Russian we frequently encounter enclitic conjunctions such as бо 'for', or жє 'and', as the second word of their clause. For example we find the following in the Primary Chronicle:

 	 	бѣ	 	бо	 	самъ	 	любя	 	жєнꙑ
 	 	was	 	for	 	he himself	 	loving	 	women
meaning "for he himself was loving women", i.e. he loved women. We also find in the Primary Chronicle

 	 	Они	 	жє	 	рѣша...
 	 	They	 	and	 	said...
meaning "And they said...". Such enclitics often serve to mark the transition between clauses, and the regularity of their position after the first accented word of their clause can often assist the reader to identify clause boundaries where no other punctuation is readily available.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 2
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
II.ii Trade
As we have seen, the rivers provided natural thoroughfares throughout the East European expanse, and the settled populations along with enterprising outsiders quickly adapted these advantages to a diffuse and robust system of trade. At the easternmost extreme, where the initially eastward flowing Volga makes a sweeping turn toward the Caspian in the south, we find Bulgar, a trading hub dominated by a Turkic tribe of the same name. This cultural center occupied a special position along the Volga: it sat at the very edge of the Central Asian steppe. This prominent position at the edge of Central Asia's most productive superhighway meant that Bulgar formed a point of departure for an eastward journey along the Silk Road through predominantly Turkic-speaking cultures on the way to the Far East. Archaeological finds unearthing coins show specimens minted in Persia and Afghanistan. And accounts by Arab travelers of the 10th century such as Ibn Fadlan tell us that entrepreneurial Vikings known as Rus made their way along the rivers to Bulgar in search of eastern adornments.

Coins provide an excellent mechanism by which to follow trade, largely because they are durable and generally display distinctive features of their origin in their imprint. And coins similar to those found in Bulgar highlight a trade route extending up the Volga and westward along the Oka as it winds its way to its source in the central Uplands. Here the continued discovery of coins suggests the trade route hopped rivers: a relatively short overland trek could bridge the gap between the headwaters of the Oka and those of the Dnieper. This latter flowed westward just to the south of Smolensk, before turning south toward the Black Sea. But archaeological finds suggest that Smolensk was less economically important than a trading post just to its west: Gnezdovo.

Gnezdovo's location, viewed from the standpoint of commerce, was spectacular. Its easy access to the headwaters of the Dnieper and thence the Oka meant that it formed western outpost of the east-west trade route that led to Bulgar and beyond that the Silk Road. At the same time, Gnezdovo sat at the elbow of the Dnieper as it turned south toward the Black Sea. On this route lay Kiev (Kyiv), soon to be a cultural and political driving force within the nascent Russian state. And beyond, across the Black Sea itself, lay the imperial metropolis of Byzantium.

By this same elbow of the Dnieper, however, we find via a short overland passage the headwaters of the river Dvina. This flows west until if finally empties into the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea. Thus Gnezdovo provided the linchpin in an east-west trade route that extended in the west from the shores of the Baltic and Scandinavia beyond to Bulgar and the Eurasian thoroughfare known as the steppe.

But also departing from Gnezdovo the river Lovat flowed north to Lake Ilmen and Novgorod, in many respects the birthplace of the emerging East Slavic identity in the annals of history. From there a trip north along the river Volkhov led to Lake Ladoga, to whose west lay the Gulf of Finland and the greater Baltic Sea beyond. Thus Gnezdovo formed the central junction in a north-south trade route starting in Byzantium in the south, passing upward through Kiev (Kyiv) and then Gnezdovo. From there one continued north to Novogorod and beyond into the reaches of Finnish tribes surrounding Lake Ladoga before turning west to the Baltic once again and its flowing Scandinavian trade.

The Scandinavians early grew wise to the existence of such trade routes. Artifacts from sites in Scandinavia proper show that their trade networks enabled the acquisition of Far Eastern goods. Runic inscriptions prove Scandinavian presence in the region surrounding Lake Ladoga, as well as in Berezanji at the mouth of the Dnieper in the Black Sea. This latter corroborates early accounts stating that Varangians, a particular subgroup of Scandinavians, already formed part of the Byzantine emperor's personal guard as early as the 10th century. And we have seen that Arab authors of roughly the same period place Scandinavians in Bulgar. Though the physical descriptions given often fail to distinguish Scandinavians from many other European peoples, the mention of one particular practice clinches the assertion that at least some of the tall, shaggy blond traders were indeed Scandinavians: ship burials.

It is in fact the burial finds of Gnezdovo that confirm a strong Scandinavian presence there as well. It is hard to say whether the outpost started as a Scandinavian trading colony or whether it was simply the case that Scandinavians maintained a continued presence in an otherwise multicultural trade center. For example, the swords found in many burials are not specific to the Scandinavians of the era. But we do find the signs of ship burials, which provide a definite hallmark of long-term Scandinavian habitation.

Though ideally located at the intersection of both north-south and east-west trade routes, Gnezdovo seems never to have been more than a large trading post or point of transfer. It never developed into a cultural center within the emerging Russian state. That distinction instead went first to Novgorod, to its north. Located beside Lake Ilmen, Novgorod was situated firmly within the forested reaches of the Eastern European expanse. As such it early seems to have provided a center for a rich trade in furs extending into the Baltic. That this was so is recorded not only in early Russian literature, but likewise in the Viking Sagas, where the city went by the name of Holmgard.

As Novgorod's centrality in Eastern Europe waned, the baton eventually passed to Kiev (Kyiv), to the south of Gnezdovo, situated on the Dnieper. Kiev too laid claim to a fortuitous location: near the transition from wooded land to Eurasian steppe. Thus Kiev not only formed a key midpoint in north-south trade between Gnezdovo and points north and Byzantium to its south. But according to Arab accounts of the trade of Frankish swords, Kiev also seemed to lie at the crux of a second, more southerly, east-west trade route: Frankish swords would pass through Prague on their way eventually to Kiev, before passing into the hands of Turkic traders and others making their living traversing the lightly levied paths along the steppe. This trade route, it seems, suffered little influence from the wide-ranging Scandinavians.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The following passage completes the Primary Chronicle's account of the Invitation to the Varangians. In particular we learn of the three Varangian brothers who led settlers to the lands of the Eastern Slavs, and we find the events that lead to consolidation under the leadership of Rjurik.

10 - И изъбрашаяся .г. братья с роды своими, и пояша по собѣ всю русь, и придоша; старѣйший, Рюрикъ, сѣде Новѣгородѣ, а другий, Синеусъ, на Бѣлѣ-озерѣ, а третий Изборьстѣ, Труворъ.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
изъбрашаяся -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <избрати, -бєрѫ, -бєрєши> elect, select, choose + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- were chosen # Likely to be read изъбраша ся.
г -- number; <г> three -- Three
братья -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
роды -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- clans
своими -- adjective; masculine instrumental plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
пояша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <поѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take, seize -- they took
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
собѣ -- pronoun; locative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- themselves
всю -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
русь -- proper noun; feminine accusative singular of <рѹсь> (collective) the Rus, Rus' (a Scandinavian tribe); the land of the Rus, Russia -- the Rus
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
придоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- they came
старѣйший -- comparative adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <старъ> old -- the oldest
Рюрикъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Рюрикъ> Rjurik, Ryurik, Rurik, Hroerekr (Scandinavian name) -- Rjurik
сѣде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <сѣсти, сѣдѫ, -дєши> sit down -- settled
Новѣгородѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Новъ Градъ> Novgorod (literally 'Newtown') -- in Novogord
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
другий -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <дрѹгъ> other -- the second
Синеусъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Синєѹсъ> Sineus, Signjutr (Scandinavian name) -- Sineus
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- in
Бѣлѣ-озерѣ -- proper noun; neuter locative singular of <Бѣло Ѥзєро> Belo-ozero, Beloozero (literally 'White Lake', name of a lake and the surrounding region) -- Belo-ozero
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- and
третий -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <трєтьи, -тьѥ, -тьꙗ> third -- the third
Изборьстѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Изборьскъ> Izborsk -- in Izborsk # Note the palatalization of the consonant cluster -sk- to -st-.
Труворъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Трѹворъ> Truvor, Thorvardhr (Scandinavian name) -- Truvor

11 - И отъ тѣхъ варягъ прозвася Руская зємля, новугородьци, ти суть людье новогородьци отъ рода въряжьска, преже бобѣша словѣни.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- on account of
тѣхъ -- demonstrative adjective; masculine genitive plural of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- these
варягъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine genitive plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- Varangians
прозвася -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <прозвати, -зовѫ, -зовєши> call, summon + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- it is called
Руская -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <рѹсьскъ> Rus (Rus'), of the Rus, relating to the Rus, Rusian, Russian -- the Russian
зємля -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- land
новугородьци -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <новъгородькъ> Novgorodian, of Novgorod -- the Novgorodians
ти -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- they
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- are
людье -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- the... people
новогородьци -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <новъгородькъ> Novgorodian, of Novgorod -- Novgorodian
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
рода -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- the... clan
въряжьска -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <варѧжьскъ> Varangian, of the Varangians -- Varangian
преже -- adverb; <прѣждє> before -- before
бобѣша -- conjunction; <бо> for + verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- for... they were
словѣни -- adjective used as substantive; masculine locative plural of <словѣнинъ> Slovene, of the Slovene tribe (located on Lake Ilmen near Novgorod) -- the Slovenes

12 - По двою же лѣту Синєусъ умре и братъ его Труворъ; и прия власть Рюрикъ и раздая мужємъ своимъ грады, овому Полотескъ, овому Ростовъ, другому Бѣло-озєро.
 Collapse All
По -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
двою -- number adjective; neuter locative dual of <дъва, дъвѣ> two -- two
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
лѣту -- noun; neuter locative dual of <лѣто> year, summer -- years
Синєусъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Синєѹсъ> Sineus, Signjutr (Scandinavian name) -- Sineus
умре -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹмрѣти, -рѫ, -рєши> die -- died
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- as well as
братъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
Труворъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Трѹворъ> Truvor, Thorvardhr (Scandinavian name) -- Truvor
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- so
прия -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <приѩти, приимѫ, приимєши> take, seize -- assumed
власть -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <власть> rule, power, authority; despotic rule, tyranny -- power
Рюрикъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Рюрикъ> Rjurik, Ryurik, Rurik, Hroerekr (Scandinavian name) -- Rjurik
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- as well as
раздая -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <раздаꙗти, -даѭ, -даѥши> distribute, give out -- distributed
мужємъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- to... men
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
грады -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- cities
овому -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine dative singular of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- to one
Полотескъ -- proper noun; masculine accusative singular of <Полотьскъ> Polotsk (name of a city) -- Polotsk
овому -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine dative singular of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- to another
Ростовъ -- proper noun; masculine accusative singular of <Ростовъ> Rostov (name of a city) -- Rostov
другому -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative singular of <дрѹгъ> other -- to yet another
Бѣло-озєро -- proper noun; neuter accusative singular of <Бѣло Ѥзєро> Belo-ozero, Beloozero (literally 'White Lake', name of a lake and the surrounding region) -- Belo-ozero

13 - И по тѣмъ городомъ суть находици варязи, а перьвии насєльници в Новѣгородѣ словѣне, въ Полотьстѣ кривичи, в Ростовѣ меря, в Бѣлѣ-озерѣ весь, в Муромѣ мурома, и тѣми всѣми обладаше Рюрикъ.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
тѣмъ -- demonstrative adjective; masculine dative plural of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- those
городомъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- cities
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- are
находици -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <ноходьникъ> invader -- invaders
варязи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- the Varangians
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- as
перьвии -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <пръвъ> first -- the first
насєльници -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <насєльникъ> inhabitant, resident; native; immigrant -- inhabitants
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Новѣгородѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Новъ Градъ> Novgorod (literally 'Newtown') -- Novogord
словѣне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <словѣнинъ> Slovene, of the Slovene tribe (located on Lake Ilmen near Novgorod) -- (were) the Slovenes
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Полотьстѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Полотьскъ> Polotsk (name of a city) -- Polotsk # Note the palatalization of the consonant cluster -sk- to -st-.
кривичи -- noun; masculine nominative plural <кривичи> (pl.) the Krivitchians (a Slavic tribe) -- the Krivitchians
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Ростовѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Ростовъ> Rostov (name of a city) -- Rostov
меря -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <меря> (collective) the Merians (a Finnish tribe, in the region of Jaroslavl and Rostov, along the Volga river) -- the Merians
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Бѣлѣ-озерѣ -- proper noun; neuter locative singular of <Бѣло Ѥзєро> Belo-ozero, Beloozero (literally 'White Lake', name of a lake and the surrounding region) -- Belo-ozero
весь -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <весь> (collective) the Ves, Vepsians (a Finnish tribe between Lakes Ladoga and Belo-ozero) -- the Ves
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Муромѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Муромъ> Murom (name of a city) -- Murom
мурома -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <мурома> the Muroma (a Finnish tribe inhabiting the region along the Oka river) -- the Muroma
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
тѣми -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine instrumental plural of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- these
всѣми -- adjective; masculine instrumental plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all (of)
обладаше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <обладати, -даѭ, -даѥши> (freq. w. instr.) rule, rule (over), lead, reign -- ruled over
Рюрикъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Рюрикъ> Rjurik, Ryurik, Rurik, Hroerekr (Scandinavian name) -- Rjurik

14 - И бяста у него .в. мужа, не племени его, но боярина, и та испросистася ко Царюгороду с родомъ своимъ.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
бяста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there were
у -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- with
него -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- him
в -- number; <в> two -- two
мужа -- noun; masculine nominative dual of <мѫжь> man, husband -- men
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
племени -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <плємѧ> seed; sprout, shoot; generation; breed, species, type; tribe, group -- of... tribe
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but rather
боярина -- noun; masculine nominative dual of <боꙗринъ> noble, aristocrat, bojar, boyar -- bojars
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
та -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative dual of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- they
испросистася -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <испросити, -жѫ, -сиши> seek, search (for); gain by asking + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- were sought (to go)
ко -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
Царюгороду -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Цѣсарь Градъ> Byzantium, Constantinople (literally 'the Emperor's City') -- Byzantium
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
родомъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- clan
своимъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their

15 - И поидоста по Днѣпру, и идуче мимо и узрѣста на горѣ градокъ; и упрошаста и рѣста, "чий се градокъ?"
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
поидоста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- they went
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- along
Днѣпру -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Днѣпръ> Dnieper, (Russ.) Dnepr, (Belor.) Dnjapro, (Ukr.) Dnipro, (classical) Danapris (name of a river flowing into the Black Sea) -- the Dnieper
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
идуче -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- (while) going # Note the use of the plural in the participle rather than the dual, as consistently used in the finite verb forms in this passage. This hints at the transfer of the masculine plural participial form into a fixed gerund, lacking grammatical agreement.
мимо -- adverb; <мимо> past, by -- by
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
узрѣста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <ѹзрѣти, -зрѫ, -зриши> look at, behold; see -- they caught sight of
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
горѣ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <гора> mountain -- a hill
градокъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъкъ> town, city, walled enclosure -- a city
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
упрошаста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <ѹпросити, -шѫ, -сиши> ask, interrogate, question -- they asked
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
рѣста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
чий -- interrogative adjective; masculine nominative singular of <чьи, чьѥ, чьꙗ> whose, of whom -- Whose
се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter nominative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this # Possibly to be understood as a fully-vocalized form of the masculine nominative singular form сь.
градокъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъкъ> town, city, walled enclosure -- city

16 - Они же рѣша, "была суть .г. братья, Кий, Щекъ, Хоривъ, иже сдѣлаша градокось, и изгибоша, и мы сѣдимъ, платяче дань родомъ ихъ козаромъ".
 Collapse All
Они -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- replied
была -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- There were
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- ... # Note the agreement with the logical number of the subject, three (hence plural), rather than the grammatical number (singular), which is determined by братья
г -- number; <г> three -- three
братья -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers
Кий -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Кꙑи> Kyi, Kii (legendary founder of Kiev) -- Kyi
Щекъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Щєкъ> Shchek, Shek (brother of Kyi) -- Shchek
Хоривъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Хоривъ> Khoriv, Xoriv (brother of Kyi) -- Khoriv
иже -- relative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <ижє> who, which -- who
сдѣлаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <съдѣлати, -аѭ, -аѥши> found, establish; work, build -- founded
градокось -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъкъ> town, city, walled enclosure + demonstrative adjective; masculine accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this city # Note that the phrase градокъ сь is pronounced as a unit. In such a situation, the final jer of сь is word-final and weak, and the final jer of the accusative градокъ now precedes a weak jer, and so is fully vocalized as -о-.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
изгибоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <изгꙑбати, -баѭ -блѭ, -баѥши -блѥши> perish, be destroyed -- they perished
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
мы -- pronoun; nominative plural of <азъ> I -- we
сѣдимъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <сѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> sit, remain -- remain
платяче -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <платити, -штѫ, -тиши> loose, free, set free, pay -- paying
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
родомъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <родъ> race, kind, sort; generation; birth -- clans
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- their
козаромъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <козаринъ> Khazar, of the Khazars (a Turkic tribe located along the Volga) -- Khazar

17 - Асколдъ же и Диръ остаста въ градѣ сємь, и многи варяги съвокуписта, и начаста владѣти Польскою землею, Рюрику же княжащу в Новѣгородѣ.
 Collapse All
Асколдъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Асколдъ, Осколдъ> Askold, Askuldr (Scandinavian name) -- Askold
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
Диръ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Диръ> Dir (Scandinavian name) -- Dir
остаста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <остати, останѫ, останєши> stay behind, remain -- remained
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- city
сємь -- demonstrative adjective; masculine locative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
многи -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <мъногъ> much, many -- many
варяги -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- Varangians # See prior note on the lack of palatalization of the velar consonant
съвокуписта -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <съвъкѹпити, -плѭ, -пиши> lead together, collect, gather -- they brought together
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
начаста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- they began
владѣти -- verb; infinitive of <владѣти, -дѣѭ, -дѣѥши> (freq. w. instr.) rule, rule over, hold power (over) -- to rule
Польскою -- adjective; feminine instrumental singular of <польскъ> Poljan, Polian, Poljanian, Polianian, of the Poljan tribe (a Slavic tribe living along the Dnieper) -- Poljanian
землею -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the... land
Рюрику -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Рюрикъ> Rjurik, Ryurik, Rurik, Hroerekr (Scandinavian name) -- Rjurik
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
княжащу -- participle; masculine dative singular of <кнѧжити, -жѫ, -жиши> rule, be king, have power -- (with)... ruling # Note the use of the dative absolute (here with Рюрику) to describe an action attendant on the main clause, but grammatically independent of it
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
Новѣгородѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Новъ Градъ> Novgorod (literally 'Newtown') -- Novogord

Lesson Text
10 - И изъбрашаяся .г. братья с роды своими, и пояша по собѣ всю русь, и придоша; старѣйший, Рюрикъ, сѣде Новѣгородѣ, а другий, Синеусъ, на Бѣлѣ-озерѣ, а третий Изборьстѣ, Труворъ. 11 - И отъ тѣхъ варягъ прозвася Руская зємля, новугородьци, ти суть людье новогородьци отъ рода въряжьска, преже бобѣша словѣни. 12 - По двою же лѣту Синєусъ умре и братъ его Труворъ; и прия власть Рюрикъ и раздая мужємъ своимъ грады, овому Полотескъ, овому Ростовъ, другому Бѣло-озєро. 13 - И по тѣмъ городомъ суть находици варязи, а перьвии насєльници в Новѣгородѣ словѣне, въ Полотьстѣ кривичи, в Ростовѣ меря, в Бѣлѣ-озерѣ весь, в Муромѣ мурома, и тѣми всѣми обладаше Рюрикъ. 14 - И бяста у него .в. мужа, не племени его, но боярина, и та испросистася ко Царюгороду с родомъ своимъ. 15 - И поидоста по Днѣпру, и идуче мимо и узрѣста на горѣ градокъ; и упрошаста и рѣста, "чий се градокъ?" 16 - Они же рѣша, "была суть .г. братья, Кий, Щекъ, Хоривъ, иже сдѣлаша градокось, и изгибоша, и мы сѣдимъ, платяче дань родомъ ихъ козаромъ". 17 - Асколдъ же и Диръ остаста въ градѣ сємь, и многи варяги съвокуписта, и начаста владѣти Польскою землею, Рюрику же княжащу в Новѣгородѣ.
Translation
10 Three brothers were chosen with their clans, and they took after them all the Rus, and they came: the oldest, Rjurik, settled in Novgorod; but the second, Sineus, in Belo-ozero; and the third, Truvor, in Izborsk. 11 And on account of these Varangians it is called the Russian land; the Novgorodians, they are the Novgorodian people from the Varangian clan, for before they were the Slovenes. 12 But after two years Sineus died, as well as his brother Truvor; so Rjurik assumed power and distributed cities to his men, to one Polotsk, to another Rostov, and to yet another Belo-ozero. 13 And in those cities the Varangians are invaders, as the first inhabitants in Novgorod (were) the Slovenes, in Polotsk the Krivitchians, in Rostov the Merians, in Belo-ozero the Ves, in Murom the Muroma, and Rjurik ruled over all of these. 14 And with him there were two men, not of his tribe, but rather bojars, and they were sought (to go) to Byzantium with their clan. 15 And they went along the Dnieper, and while going by they caught sight of a city on a hill; and they asked and said: "Whose city is this?" 16 And they replied: "There were three brothers, Kyi, Shchek, and Khoriv, who founded this city; and they perished, and we remain, paying tribute to their Khazar clans." 17 Askold and Dir remained in this city, and they brought together many Varangians, and they began to rule the Poljanian land, with Rjurik ruling in Novgorod.
Grammar
6 Palatalization & Retraction
Though the Slavic languages share a common ancestry with other Indo-European languages such as English, Latin, Sanskrit, and Old Irish, the Slavic family has undergone certain sound shifts that distinguish it from other branches of the family tree. One of the most pervasive of these shifts, and the one that perhaps contributes most forcefully to the consonant sequences that so strike the ear as distinguishing Slavic languages from all others, is palatalization. This palatalization in fact occurred in three distinct waves, and a basic understanding of these various shifts will aid the reader in understanding the history of the language family and the vast scholarly literature.

In addition we find that in certain environments, certain sounds underwent a different process called retraction. The Slavic languages share features of this process with their Indo-Iranian cousins. In the following subsections we will look more closely at the particular phonological shifts involved and the environments in which they occurred. These shifts play an important role in distinguishing the various conjugation classes of the present tense and in the formation of the past tenses.

6.1 Background: Important Vowel Shifts
In the most basic sense, all of the various waves of palatalization can be traced back to the influence of front vowels and yod. A mild acquaintance with certain aspects of the evolution of the vowels, and particularly the diphthongs, will assist in understanding the process of palatalization.

In the passage from the surmised language of the once semi-homogeneous culture of the Indo-Europeans -- termed Proto-Indo-European (PIE) -- to the common tongue spoken by the Slavic community as a whole -- termed Common Slavic (CS) or Proto-Slavic (PSl) -- before its eventual dissolution into several distinct regional varieties, front vowels tended to remain front vowels, and back vowels tended to remain back. The vowels did not necessarily remain the same: for example PIE *a and *o, both back vowels, merged into CS *a. Thus the backness remained intact, though PIE *o lost its roundness.

Moreover, Common Slavic adopted a tendency toward open syllables. That is, where a vowel was followed by a sequence of consonants, all of those consonants tended to be assigned to the following syllable. Such is not the case in other Indo-European (IE) languages: for example, Latin incertus 'undetermined' divides into syllables as in-cer-tus, so that the consonant cluster -rt- is split between syllables. But the Old Russian term мужьство 'manliness' divides as му-жь-ство, assigning the entire cluster -stv- to the following syllable. When a syllable-final consonant cluster consisted of a nasal followed by non-nasal consonant, the preceding syllable was opened instead by nasalizing the preceding vowel. Thus corresponding to Latin pons 'bridge' (with genitive pontis, syllabically pon-tis) we find OCS пѫть [pǫ-tĭ] 'way', with nasalization of the o in the first syllable. This nasalization was subsequently lost in the East Slavic dialects, including Old Russian: путь 'way'.

The final major tendency which concerns us is monophthongization. This denotes a shift whereby the PIE diphthongs -- consisting of any of the three basic vowels PIE *e, *a, *o (both long and short variants) followed by the PIE semivowels *i, *u -- were simplified in Common Slavic into the individual vowels, or monophthongs, *i, *ě, *u. Such monophthongization occurred when the original diphthongs were followed by a consonant. A diphthong in such a position is termed tautosyllabic, i.e. both elements of the diphthong remained within the same syllable. However when a vowel followed the diphthong, the rule of open syllables dictated that the final semivowel of the diphthong be reanalyzed as the initial consonant of the following syllable:

PIE *ai-a > CS *a-ja > OR а-ꙗ;
PIE *ou-o > CS *o-vo > OR о-во.
Diphthongs in this position are termed heterosyllabic, i.e. the elements of the diphthong when reanalyzed straddle a syllable boundary. Heterosyllabic diphthongs were thus analyzed into their constituent parts and escaped the process of monophthongization. For example the PIE root *ei- 'go' gives Greek ei-mi, but OR и-ти via monophthongization. Similarly PIE *h2ous- gives Latin auris and OR ухо, both 'ear'. But PIE *nou-os yields Latin novus and OR новъ, since the diphthong *-ou- finds itself in heterosyllabic position.

6.2 Palatalization of Velars
The palatalization of velar consonants denotes a process of mutative palatalization. That is, over time velar consonants in certain contexts changed their point of articulation from the velum to the hard palate to such a degree that the result was in effect a new consonant. This shift occurred in those environments in which the velar sounds were in close proximity to front vowels or yod; for example, if a front vowel followed a velar consonant, the speaker's tongue would naturally anticipate the upcoming vowel and thereby push the point of articulation of the velar consonant forward in the mouth. This shift occurred over time throughout Common Slavic as a whole, and we may isolate the effects of three distinct phases.

6.2.1 First Palatalization

The First Palatalization affected the Common Slavic velar consonants *к, *г, *х [*k, *g, *x] that found themselves immediately preceding a yod or an inherited PIE front vowel. The result in this context was *ч, *ж, *ш [*č, *ž, *š], respectively. In general these inherited PIE front vowels remained CS front vowels (here and elsewhere in these lessons, a colon following a vowel denotes the corresponding long vowel):

PIE	 	CS	 	OR
*i	 	*ĭ	 	ь
*e	 	*e	 	є
*eN	 	*ę	 	я
*i:	 	*i	 	и
*ei	 	*i	 	и
*e:	 	*ě	 	ѣ
(Note: For the most part these lessons will employ a romanized transcription for phonetic sequences representing a putative stage of Common Slavic. But on occasion we will state some phonetic principles pertaining to Common Slavic in terms of the Cyrillic alphabet for pedagogical reasons: this will help the reader more readily identify the phonetic sequences involved in actual Old Russian sources. Though this is somewhat anachronistic, if we take the viewpoint that OCS and Old Russian represent a very late stage of Common Slavic, then the practice will not seem too out of place.)

Thus the conditioning environment remains visible in the resulting form. But when the velars underwent this change before a PIE *e: (long-e), which normally changed to CS *ě, this *ě lost its front quality and was "backed" to я or а. For example, PIE *leg-e:-ti: > CS *ležěti > *ležjati > OR лєжати 'to lie down, recline' (cf. Schmalstieg, 1995).

Additionally the First Palatalization affected certain consonant clusters, shifting both members of the cluster. In particular, PIE *sk shifted to CS *šč, written in Old Russian as щ; and PIE *zg shifted to CS *žd. For example: PIE *tresk-e:-ti: > CS *treščěti > *treščjati > OR трєщати 'to crack'.

6.2.2 Second Palatalization

The Second Palatalization occurred as a result of monophthongization in Common Slavic. Recall the First Palatalization shifted velars that already preceded front vowels held over from PIE. But there were also back vowels inherited from PIE, and some of these formed the first member of diphthongs. As outlined above, tautosyllabic diphthongs underwent monophthongization. This produced in many instances front vowels -- specifically *и [*i] and *ѣ [*ě] -- in positions where prior there had been a back vowel. Velars before these new front vowels therefore became subject to palatalization. The results of this new, second palatalization differed from the first: Common Slavic *к, *г, *х [*k, *g, *x] shifted to *ц, *з, *с [*c, *z, *s], respectively. Consider the following examples.

Change	 	PIE	 	CS	 	OR	 	English	 	Comparanda
*k > *c	 	*kaina:	 	*cěna	 	цѣна	 	price	 	Gk poine:
*g > *z	 	*bogoi	 	*bodzi	 	бози	 	gods	 	Skt bhaga-
*x > *s	 	*snusai	 	*snŭxě	 	сносѣ	 	(to the) daughter-in-law	 	OE snoru, Lat nurus
Note in the last row that the PIE *s preceding the final *-ai first passes to CS *x according to the phenomenon of retraction (Section 6.5 below), and this *x, as it stands before CS *ě, is therefore subject to second palatalization.

This phase of palatalization may also be thought of as an assibilation. In this phase the original PIE sequence *sk underwent a shift to CS *ст [*st]. We see this for example in the reflex of the nominative masculine plural *-sk-oi encountered in adjectives such as OR кыєвьскъ 'Kievan': nominative plural людиє кыєвьстии 'the Kievan people', where the first -и- provides the reflex of PIE *-oi as a result of monophthongization and the second -и derives from the long-form adjective.

6.2.3 Third Palatalization

Finally we come to the Third Palatalization. The above two palatalizations are regressive: that is, a front vowel influences the articulation of a preceding consonant. The Third Palatalization, by contrast, is progressive: a front vowel influences the articulation of a following velar consonant. Specifically, we find that the Common Slavic velar consonants *к, *г, *х [*k, *g, *x] shifted to *ц, *з, *с [*c, *z, *s], respectively, in the following environment: when preceded by the vowels *и, *ь, *ѧ [*i, *ĭ, *ę], but only if followed directly by a vowel.

Change	 	PIE	 	CS	 	OR	 	English	 	Comparanda
*k > *c	 	*ovika:	 	*ovĭca	 	овьца	 	sheep	 	Skt avika:
*g > *z	 	*stigha:	 	*stĭdza	 	стьза	 	trail	 	Gk stikhos, Got. staiga
Along with OR стьза 'trail', compare по-стиг-ну-ти 'reach', illustrating that the changes of the Third Palatalization do not occur when the velar consonant is followed directly by another consonant.

6.3 Softening Chart
Softening is a term used by many scholars interchangeably with palatalization. The above outline of the historical changes found among the Common Slavic vowels and velar consonants holds some important implications for the structure of Old Russian as we find it in the texts that have come down to us. In particular, we find that within the same paradigm a given nominal or verbal root may display different palatalized reflexes of the velar consonants depending on the particular historical evolution of that form. Thus the neuter noun иго 'yoke' retains the original velar г in the nominative singular, but in the locative singular we find the palatalized reflex in изѣ due to the fact that the PIE ending *-oi shifted to CS *-ѣ and induced Second Palatalization. Therefore, confronted with изѣ, one must undo the effects of palatalization to arrive at the form иго which one should search for in the dictionary. To assist with such reconstruction, the following chart provides a summary of the changes due to velar palatalization.

Early CS	 	1st Palat.	 	2nd Palat.	 	3rd Palat.
*к	 	ч	 	ц	 	ц
*г	 	ж	 	з	 	з
*х	 	ш	 	с	 	с
*ск	 	щ	 	ст	 	 
*зг	 	жд	 	 	 	 
Thus, when one encounters a form involving a consonant in one of the three right-hand columns, one might consult the dictionary replacing the consonant with the corresponding consonant in the leftmost column.

6.4 j-Palatalization
Though front vowels provided a common trigger for the palatalization of consonants, they were not the only trigger. In particular the glide -j-, the yod, plays an important role in the consonant changes that characterize Common Slavic in general, and Old Russian in particular. The changes engendered by the palatal glide -j- affected not only the velar consonants, where in fact the results were identical to those of the first palatalization of velars, but also numerous other consonants as well.

One should note particularly the result of j-palatalization in the sequences *tj and *dj, which give respectively ч and ж ([č] and [ž]). These differ notably from the results of j-palatalization within Old Church Slavonic, where they became щ (equivalently written шт in OCS) and жд respectively. Thus the j-palatalization of these particular sequences serves to distinguish generally South Slavic from East Slavic, and in particular Old Church Slavonic from Old Russian.

However numerous Old Russian texts show щ [št] and жд [žd], i.e. the Old Church Slavonic reflexes, precisely where we should expect the Old Russian reflexes ч [č] and ж [ž]. Scholars have interpreted variously such orthographic fluctuation. In some instances this may herald a "bookish" orthography, by which we mean scribal sensibilities of "correct" spelling that show a heavy influence from Old Church Slavonic norms. In other instances this may simply mark either orthographic or linguistic "flexibility": either a stage, or school, of orthographic practice which simply viewed щ and ч, say, as interchangable graphemes (perhaps restricted only to certain words); or a graphic representation of an allowable variation in pronunciation within Eastern Slavic itself, perhaps with regional distinctions. In these lessons we will tend to write, say, ч where texts might also exhibit щ or шт; this is to highlight the presumably native East Slavic forms when possible or advisable. But the reader should keep in mind the possibility of variant spellings which show a more OCS-like orthography.

The following chart provides a list of the major effects of j-palatalization and some corresponding examples. The changes are grouped roughly by point of articulation of the consonants involved, though one should take care to note that, for example, though *m is a resonant, it has been grouped with other labial phonemes since the shift it undergoes bears greater similarity to that of other labials than to that of other resonants.

Articulation	 	Shift	 	Early CS	 	Late CS	 	Old Russian	 	OCS	 	Meaning
Dental	 	*tj > ч	 	*sve:t-j-a:	 	*světja	 	свѣча	 	свѣшта	 	candle
 	 	*dj > ж	 	*vid-j-om	 	*vidjǫ	 	вижу	 	виждѫ	 	I see
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Labial	 	*pj > пл҄	 	*kup-j-om	 	*kupjǫ	 	купл҄ю	 	кѹпл҄ѭ	 	I buy
 	 	*bj > бл҄	 	*ljub-j-om	 	*ljubjǫ	 	любл҄ю	 	любл҄ѭ	 	I love
 	 	*mj > мл҄	 	*zem-j-a:	 	*zemja	 	зємл҄я	 	зємл҄ꙗ	 	land
 	 	*vj > вл҄	 	*sta:v-j-om	 	*stavjǫ	 	ставл҄ю	 	ставл҄ѭ	 	I put
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Sibilant	 	*sj > ш	 	*nos-j-om	 	*nosjǫ	 	ношу	 	ношѭ	 	I carry
 	 	*zj > ж	 	*voz-j-om	 	*vozjǫ	 	вожу	 	вожѭ	 	I transport
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	*stj > щ	 	*či:st-j-om	 	*čistjǫ	 	чищу	 	чиштѫ	 	I cleanse
 	 	*zdj > жд	 	*prei-gva:zd-ja:-te:j	 	*prigvazdjati	 	пригваждати	 	пригваждати	 	to nail
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Velar	 	*kj > ч	 	*pla:k-j-onti	 	*plakjǫtĭ	 	плачуть	 	плачѫтъ	 	they weep
 	 	*gj > ж	 	*dvi:g-j-onti	 	*dvigjǫtĭ	 	движуть	 	движѫтъ	 	they move
 	 	*xj > ш	 	*sux-j-om	 	*suxjǫ	 	сушу	 	сѹшѫ	 	I dry
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	*skj > щ	 	*plesk-j-om	 	*pleskjǫ	 	плєщу	 	плєштѫ	 	I knock
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resonant	 	*nj > н҄	 	*vel-j-om	 	*veljǫ	 	вєл҄ю	 	вєл҄ѭ	 	I command
 	 	*rj > р҄	 	*bor-j-om	 	*borjǫ	 	бор҄ю	 	бор҄ѭ	 	I fight
 	 	*lj > л҄	 	*kol-j-om	 	*koljǫ	 	кол҄ю	 	кол҄ѭ	 	I cleave
In the examples above concerning shifts such as *stj > щ one should note that the symbol щ represents phonetic [šč] in Old Russian, while it represents phonetic [št] in Old Church Slavonic. Thus many OCS forms written in the table above, such as чьштѫ, can alternately be written чьщѫ, so that the consonant sequences look formally identical between the two languages. Thus the orthographic similarity of the reflexes of this phonological shift obscures some of the phonological details. Moreover we note that forms such as бор҄ю may variously be written as бор҄у or борю.

6.5 Retraction
Proto-Indo-European *-s- was involved in a sequence of changes markedly different from the process of palatalization we have been discussing up to now. When preceded by Proto-Slavic *r, *u, *k or *i, and simultaneously followed by a vowel or a sonant, Proto-Slavic *-s- shifted to *-š- before front vowels and to *-x- elsewhere.

After	 	PIE	 	CS	 	OR	 	English	 	Comparanda
*r	 	*per-sid-l-a:	 	*prěsĭdla	 	прѣшьла	 	passed	 	Lat. sedeo:, Got. sitan
 	 	*per-sod-i:-te:y	 	*prěsoditi	 	прѣходити	 	to pass	 	Lat. sedeo:, Got. sitan
*u	 	*aus-es-es	 	*usese	 	ушєсє	 	ear (gen. sg.)	 	Lat. auris, Got. auso
 	 	*aus-os	 	*uso	 	ухо	 	ear (nom. sg.)	 	Lat. auris, Got. auso
*k	 	*re:k-s-nt	 	*rěksę	 	рѣша	 	they said	 	Skt. racayati
 	 	*re:k-s-om	 	*rěksŭ	 	рѣхъ	 	I said	 	Skt. racayati
*i	 	*nok'-ey-si	 	*nosisi	 	носиши	 	you carry	 	Gk. e:nenkon
 	 	*loisa:	 	*lěsa	 	лѣха	 	garden bed	 	Lat. li:ra, Ger. Geleise
Because of the conditioning environment, with a preceding *r, *u, *k, or *i, scholars have come to call this phonetic shift the ruki rule. As the above chart shows, we can think of the ruki rule as applying to *-s- before vowels and sonants, unless in an environment suitable for regressive palatalization. Slavic shares this sound shift most notably with the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family.

7 Reduced Vowels and Full Vocalism
The term reduced vowel typically denotes a vowel whose articulation is in some sense weak: of short duration, with lips lax, with little movement of the tongue, or any combination of these. Such were the characteristics of the jers ъ and ь in early Slavic. Contrary to their typical use in Modern Russian as mere orthographic markers of the hardness or softness of the preceding consonant, the jers in early Slavic languages were indeed vowels with a pronunciation of their own. The back jer ъ and the front jer ь were, on their own, phonetically distinct; of course by their reduced nature the distinction could be blurred in the context of other consonants and vowels, and so we do find some confusion between the jers in certain texts.

As proper vowels, the jers are as consequential to the proper articulation and understanding of words as any other vowel. In this context it is curious that at times scribes omitted jers in certain words in certain manuscripts. It seems that in East Slavic in particular, in particular contrast to South Slavic, the omission of jers in the earliest manuscripts was largely due to scribal shorthand: jers were only dropped when the resulting consonant cluster was phonetically impossible in the language at the time (Gribble, 1989). The resulting consonant-consonant cluster would naturally be understood by the native speaker as consonant-vowel-consonant, and the proper jer would be inserted in reading without the necessity of a graphic representation. We discuss this in greater detail in the Introduction to Lesson 10.

In other words and manuscripts we find full vowels (i.e. non-jers) where we should expect jers. Which full vowel we find, and in place of which jer, was determined by the jer's type: strong or weak. We now turn to a discussion of this feature.

7.1 Strong and Weak Jers
One important distinction between jers is that between strong and weak. Either jer may be strong or weak: the distinction is one of placement relative to other elements of the word. We say a jer is weak if it falls at the end of a word or if it precedes a syllable with a full vowel. A strong jer is one which immediately precedes a syllable with a weak jer. In practical terms we may define a simple algorithm for determining which jers are strong and which weak in a given word: we find the weak jer nearest the end of the word, and then we alternate between strong and weak as we move backward through the word, starting over with weak every time we cross over a syllable with a full vowel. As an example, let us take the past passive participle отъкръвєнъ 'open'. The following table labels the strong and weak jers by syllable.

Syllable	 	о	 	тъ	 	кръ	 	вє	 	нъ
Jer	 	--	 	strong	 	weak	 	--	 	weak
According to the algorithm, we start at the right-most jer: this occurs at word-end, and so is weak. Moving left, we must skip over a full vowel; the next jer we meet is therefore weak. And the jer immediately to the left of that is strong. Moving left we hit another full vowel, and then we have finished the word.

We must be careful to realize that the labels strong and weak applied to jers are labels tied to the surface form under discussion, not to some canonical dictionary form of the word. For example, consider the nominative singular form of the city name смольньскъ 'Smolensk':

Syllable	 	смо	 	ль	 	нь	 	скъ
Jer	 	--	 	weak	 	strong	 	weak
Compare this to the genitive singular form смольньска of the same word:

Syllable	 	смо	 	ль	 	нь	 	ска
Jer	 	--	 	strong	 	weak	 	--
We see that in one and the same word, a given jer may be strong or weak depending on the particular surface form.

This alternation becomes important given another feature of the historical evolution of Russian phonology: in later manuscripts, weak jers were often dropped and strong jers were promoted to full vowels. When promoted to full vowels, the front jer was promoted to the front vowel є, the back jer ъ to the back vowel о. We see in the example of Smolensk that such promotion in the nominative singular would potentially yield смолнєск. But in the genitive singular, the same procedure yields смолєнска. Moreover, other forms such as the locative singular смольньскѣ would have the same pattern of strong and weak jers as the genitive: the locative would become смолєнскѣ. Such reinforcement of a particular pattern of strong and weak jers throughout the rest of the paradigm likely stimulated the replacement of the nominative stem with the stem encountered in the bulk of other forms, and that led to the modern form of the name Смоленск.

The determination of strong and weak jers ties itself to the phonological word, that is to any phrasal unit pronounced together as a word. Thus in isolation the word дьнь 'day' shows a strong jer in the first syllable, and so we also expect to find the є-vocalism in that particular form of the word: дєнь. But when accompanied by a following deictic in the phrase дьнь сь 'this day', the phrase was evidently pronounced as an unbroken unit. As such the second syllable, rather than the first, finds itself with the strong jer: дьньсь becomes дьнєсь or днес 'today'.

7.2 Tense Jers
We have noted that Old Russian, like Old Church Slavonic, had special symbols for many full vowels with a preceding yod: ꙗ, ѥ, ю. However no special symbol existed for a jer with a preceding yod. In particular it turns out that instances abound where the front jer preceded by a yod, јь, is written и. One of the most common examples is the nominative singular masculine of the relative pronoun: ижє 'he who', reflecting an underlying jĭže. The same is true of the accusative singular masculine pronominal form и, reflecting jĭ; the corresponding nominative form *и [*jĭ] is unattested.

We say a jer is tense when followed by yod, j. Speakers often heard tense jers as a corresponding full vowel: a tense front jer ĭj became i, a tense back jer ŭj became y. We find this reflected in the spelling: instead of добръи [dobrŭjĭ] 'the good one' we often find the spelling добрыи [dobryjĭ]; and for гостьи [gostĭjĭ] 'of the guests' we find гостии [gostijĭ].

Note that tense position can span word boundaries. Thus we find молихы и [molixy jĭ] 'I asked him' for expected молихъ и [molixŭ jĭ]; also заѹшахѹти и [zaušaxuti jĭ] 'they beat him' for заѹшахѹть и [zaušaxutĭ jĭ]. Moreover, sometimes the fact that a jer may be strong can be reflected instead of the fact that it is tense. For example, in больнъи [bolĭnŭjĭ] 'the sick one' the ъ, though tense, is also strong, and so we find больнои [bolĭnoi]. Similarly for костьи [kostĭjĭ] 'of the bones' we find костєи [kostejĭ], where the strong jer ь has been promoted to the corresponding full vowel є even though in tense position.

7.3 Pleophony
The above discussion of historical phonology has centered on changes common to Old Church Slavonic and Old Russian, and for the most part to the Slavic language family as a whole. We now take a moment to discuss a feature truly indicative of the Eastern Slavic subgroup of the Slavic family: pleophony (Russ. polnoglasie, Ger. Vollaut), also known as full vocalism. This concerns the treatment of resonant diphthongs -- that is, diphthongs composed of a vowel followed by a resonant, particularly r or l -- when between consonants. In this discussion we let C, or more traditionally T, denote any consonant, and we let R denote the resonants r or l.

Common Slavic inherited numerous words fitting the pattern ToRT: that is, some consonant, followed by the resonant diphthong *o plus *r or *l, followed in turn by some other consonant. For example, we find in many Slavic languages reflexes of a Proto-Slavic word *gordŭ, etymologically related to Gothic garda 'enclosure, pen' and ultimately to English garden. The reflex of this Common Slavic term in OCS is градъ [gradŭ], displaying the general tendency in South Slavic to reverse the order of the elements of the diphthong: ToRT becomes TRoT, hence CS *gordŭ becomes *grodŭ and this yields OCS градъ.

The motivation behind the shift in the order of elements is once again the rule of open syllables: resonants such as r and l have the ability to function either as consonants or as vowels. We see this in the English word little: the first l functions as a consonant preceding the vowel i of the first syllable lit-; the second l, however, serves as the vowel of the second syllable -tle. The final -e is silent: the last syllable is phonetically [tl]. In Common Slavic, sequences of the form VR, where V represents a vowel, were diphthongs in the same sense as those formed with the semi-vowels i and u. At that stage of the language, a sequence of the form ToRTV would have been interpreted as ToR-TV, and since oR was a diphthong, this fit the pattern of open syllables: TV-TV. But as the resonant element of the diphthong came to be interpreted in its consonantal function, the sequence ToR-TV conformed to the pattern TVT-TV and the initial syllable became closed. In the effort to re-open the closed syllable, various branches of Slavic applied various sound changes, and as we have seen above the tendency in South Slavic was to reverse the order of resonant and vowel in the first syllable: ToR-TV gave way to TRo-TV.

East Slavic, by contrast, took a different tack. Rather than reverse the order of elements, in East Slavic we find the introduction of an anaptyctic vowel between the resonant and the following consonant. This vowel generally took on the quality of the vowel of the preceding syllable. Thus ToRT gave way to ToRoT in East Slavic. As a result, whereas CS *gordŭ yielded градъ in Old Church Slavonic, in Old Russian we find instead городъ 'city'. This process is termed pleophony, a term created to translate the Russian term polnoglasie. This feature provides one of the clearest distinctions between the development of East Slavic and that of the rest of the Slavic family. The same change applied to syllables with an e-vocalism, where TeRT yields TeReT:

CS	 	OCS	 	OR	 	Meaning	 	Comparanda
*gordŭ	 	градъ	 	городъ	 	city	 	Goth. garda
*golva	 	глава	 	голова	 	head	 	Lat. calva
*bermę	 	брѣмѧ	 	бєрємя	 	burden	 	Skt. bhariman-
*vermę	 	врѣмѧ	 	вєрємя	 	time	 	Skt. vartman-
Given this steadfast mark of the East Slavic dialect, what then are we to make of forms such as врємя 'time' so frequently encountered in Old Russian texts? Traditionally scholars generally assume that these show the extent of the influence of Old Church Slavonic on the early Russian literary language: врємя was borrowed into Old Russian via Old Church Slavonic. This occurs with a great many roots, and so the Old Russian texts that have survived to modern times show a language employing borrowed terms like врємѧ alongside their native counterparts like вєрємя. By the same token, we may alternately conjecture that the shift of ToRT to ToRoT within East Slavic had not yet permeated the entire East Slavic speaking community during the period of the the earliest Old Russian texts. From this point of view, scribes may have admitted forms such as врємя on the basis that such forms reflected a common alternate regional pronunciation of ToRoT forms.

8 Personal Pronouns
8.1 First and Second Person Pronouns
The first and second person pronouns of Old Russian show forms for all numbers and for all cases except the vocative. The nominative forms, as a general rule, appear less frequently than the oblique case forms. Given that the verbal morphology usually makes clear the person and number, the nominative forms of the personal pronouns are mostly redundant. Old Russian therefore employs them primarily when particular emphasis is needed, for example to highlight a change in subject. In contrast to some languages such as Spanish or German, which distinguish second person pronouns based on the perceived social status of the person addressed relative to the person speaking (e.g. Sp. tu vs. usted, Ger. du vs. Sie), Old Russian uses the same second person pronoun regardless of social considerations. Use of singular, dual, or plural refers only to number and marks no recognition of social status. The table below lists the forms of the first person pronoun азъ 'I' and the second person pronoun ты 'thou, you'.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	азъ, я	 	вѣ	 	мы	 	 	 	 	 	ты	 	ва	 	вы
A	 	мя	 	на	 	ны	 	 	 	 	 	тя	 	ва	 	вы
G	 	мєнє	 	наю	 	насъ	 	 	 	 	 	тєбє, тобє	 	ваю	 	васъ
L	 	мєнѣ	 	наю	 	насъ	 	 	 	 	 	тєбѣ, тобѣ	 	ваю	 	васъ
D	 	мєнѣ (ми)	 	нама (на)	 	намъ (на, ны)	 	 	 	 	 	тєбѣ, тобѣ (ти)	 	вама (ва)	 	вамъ (ва, вы)
I	 	мъною	 	нама	 	нами	 	 	 	 	 	тобою	 	вама	 	вами
V	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
The forms in parentheses are the enclitic, or unstressed, forms. These forms typically follow a stressed word, often the first in their clause. In particular the enclitic forms never stand as the first word in a clause, and they typically do not occur after prepositions. Take for example the following statement by Olga in the story of Olga's Revenge: люба ми єсть рѣчь ваша 'Your proposal is pleasing to me.'

Though there is a general tendency in Old Russian to prefer using the genitive in place of the accusative for animate (more specifically male human) direct objects, this tendency is more pronounced with the personal pronouns. We very frequently find the genitive forms used in place of the accusative.

8.2 Reflexive Pronoun
Old Russian uses a special pronoun when the entity in an oblique case refers back to the subject. This is the reflexive pronoun сєбє, which plays a role akin to the English suffix -self in words such as himself, herself, itself, etc. In an English statement such as I was asking myself..., the direct object of the verb asking is the same as the subject, and we mark that reflexivity in part by using -self. In English the entity to which we append -self depends on the person of the subject: I was asking myself..., You were asking yourself..., She was asking herself..., etc. Typically Old Russian uses the same reflexive pronoun сєбє for all persons. Moreover, in English we mark that the reflexive refers to a plural subject by appending -selves rather than -self: They were asking themselves.... Old Russian, by contrast, uses the same, morphologically singular, pronoun сєбє to refer back to subjects of any number: singular, dual, or plural. The following table lists the forms.

 	 	Sg./Du./Pl.
N	 	 
A	 	ся
G	 	сєбє
L	 	сєбѣ, собѣ
D	 	сєбѣ, собѣ (си)
I	 	сєбою
V	 	 
Naturally the reflexive pronoun exhibits no nominative or vocative case forms: pronouns in general do not display vocative forms, and the nominative is filled by the nominative form of the pronoun for the proper person, first, second, or third, or by the noun itself. Moreover we find the enclitic form си for the dative, and as with other pronouns the genitive form often appears where an accusative would be expected.

8.3 Third Person Pronoun
Old Russian contains a number of pronouns which can serve to mark the third person. However all except one have some sort of deictic force (that is, they point to something) and are more or less proximal or distal (that is, they point to something relatively close to, or far from, the speaker). The one pronoun which has no special deictic force is *и 'he'. As it happens, this pronoun does not occur in the nominative, hence the asterisk showing that the form does not occur in extant texts, but rather that it is reconstructed. As we have seen above, the nominative of pronouns is only used for emphasis. Thus when the utterance calls for a nominative pronominal form, Old Russian often employs the nominative of one of the many deictic pronouns available: тъ 'that one', онъ 'that one over there' (distal), or less frequently сь 'this one' (proximal).

The basic stem of the third person pronoun is *j-. When followed by the proper nominative masculine ending -ĭ, this yields *jĭ, which in Cyrillic is written as *и. The masculine accusative form does occur, and it is identical to the nominative form: и. The reader must take care to distinguish this from the conjunction и 'and'. Consider the phrase пожьжє и "She burned it", taken from the story of Olga's Revenge, where и here refers to the masculine noun градъ 'city' in the accusative singular. The following table gives the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	*и	 	*ѥ	 	*я
A	 	и	 	ѥ	 	ю
G	 	єго	 	єго	 	єѣ, єя
L	 	ємь	 	ємь	 	єи
D	 	єму	 	єму	 	єи
I	 	имь	 	имь	 	єю
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	*я	 	*и	 	*и
A	 	я	 	и	 	и
G	 	єю	 	єю	 	єю
L	 	єю	 	єю	 	єю
D	 	има	 	има	 	има
I	 	има	 	има	 	има
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	*и	 	*я	 	*ѣ, *я
A	 	ѣ, я	 	я	 	ѣ, я
G	 	ихъ	 	ихъ	 	ихъ
L	 	ихъ	 	ихъ	 	ихъ
D	 	имъ	 	имъ	 	имъ
I	 	ими	 	ими	 	ими
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The nominative forms of this pronoun do occur in composition. In particular they occur as the final elements of the long-form adjectives. Moreover, when followed by the enclitic conjunction жє 'and', the resulting forms ижє, єжє, яжє, etc., function as relative pronouns. The first element is declined in accordance with the grammatical necessities of the clause in which it occurs, while the appended conjunction remains invariable. Thus ижє 'he who' (nominative) or ижє 'he whom' (accusative), єгожє 'he of whom' or 'it of which' (genitive), єѣжє 'she of whom' (genitive), єюжє 'the two of whom' (genitive), имъжє 'those to whom' (dative), etc.

While the genitive of the masculine pronoun, єго, often replaces the accusative и, this does not typically occur for the neuter and feminine genders. Thus we typically find accusatives ѥ 'it' and ю 'her', and єго 'of it' and єѣ 'of her' retain their genitive function.

One special point worth noting is the form these pronouns take when following prepositions. Certain prepositions contained a historical final *-n which in most environments was lost. For example въ 'in(to)', from *ŭn < *on: compare OCS ѫтрь 'inside' from *on-trĭ-, relative of Latin inter. When followed by the masculine accusative singular pronoun, this resulted in a sequence *vŭn jĭ 'into it'. Apparently the same tendency toward open syllables found in the rest of the Slavic languages applied here, and the word boundaries were re-analyzed as *vŭ njĭ > *vŭ n'ĭ. This yields in Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic въ н҄ь. In this way the pronoun developed a prothetic n when following a preposition. This n- subsequently extended to other cases, e.g. *vŭn jemĭ 'in it' became въ н҄ємь. And finally this spread to other prepositions, even those without a historical final *-n. The result is that in Old Russian, as in Old Church Slavonic, the third person pronoun receives a prothetic n- following any preposition: for example, отъ н҄єго 'out of it'.

9 The Present System
The present system, that is those forms which derive from the present tense stem, comprises: the present tense, the imperfect, the imperative, the present participles active and passive, and the infinitive. We have already seen in Section 4 the basic formation of the present tense and the imperfect. In the following we examine the basic formation of the remaining elements of the present system.

9.1 The Imperative
The Old Russian present tense form of verbs refers to actions viewed as actually ongoing at the time of utterance, or viewed as actually about to happen in the near future. The imperfect similarly denotes actual actions, though ones which occurred prior to the moment of utterance. The imperative, by contrast, denotes not actual actions, but potential or desired actions. Properly speaking, we say that the imperative is a different mood. The present and imperfect forms we have seen, denoting actions viewed as real, are said to be in the indicative mood.

The imperative, then, is a separate mood. Specifically, the imperative denotes commands: actions which, by definition, have not occurred. Thus where несеши is 'you are carrying', the imperative неси is the direct command 'carry!' Similarly, where несеть is 'he is carrying', the imperative неси is 'let him carry!'

The forms of the imperative derive ultimately from the Proto-Indo-European optative, a mood signifying wish or desire. The marker of the PIE optative is *-oi-. As this passed into Proto-Slavic, the diphthong *-oi- became the monophthong CS *-ě-. But as this process completed, any velar consonants preceding this *-ě- were subject to second palatalization. Thus for example the verb рєчи 'to speak', with present stem рек-, shows the following second person dual imperative: CS *rek-oi-ta > Old Russian рьцѣта 'Speak, you (two)!' When in final position, this original *-oi- monophthongized as -и. Hence the second person singular imperative: *rek-oi > Old Russian рьци 'Speak!' The suffix *-oi- also appears as -и- in a palatal environment, i.e. when following -j- or another palatal consonant.

The following chart provides an example of the imperative forms for verbs from each present class. Note that the stem of the verb знати 'to know' is znaj-, ending with the palatal glide -j-. In this environment the reflex of PIE *-oi- becomes -и-. Moreover note that verbs of Class V often show a special ending, -ь, in the second and third person singular imperative. This ending is typically accompanied by palatalization of the preceding consonant. In addition, we see that the reflex of PIE *-oi- in the Class V verb дати 'to give' is -и- throughout the paradigm, though there is no palatal environment.

Class	 	I	 	II	 	III	 	IV	 	V
Infinitive	 	нєсти	 	двигнути	 	знати	 	любити	 	дати
Meaning	 	carry	 	move	 	know	 	love	 	give
Stem	 	nes-	 	dvign-	 	znaj-	 	ljub-i-	 	dad-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	нєси	 	двигни	 	знаи	 	любл҄и	 	дажь
3	 	нєси	 	двигни	 	знаи	 	любл҄и	 	дажь
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсѣвѣ	 	двигнѣвѣ	 	знаивѣ	 	любл҄ивѣ	 	дадивѣ
2	 	нєсѣта	 	двигнѣта	 	знаита	 	любл҄ита	 	дадита
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсѣмъ	 	двигнѣмъ	 	знаимъ	 	любл҄имъ	 	дадимъ
2	 	нєсѣтє	 	двигнѣтє	 	знаитє	 	любл҄итє	 	дадитє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
Note that the Old Russian imperative lacks a first person singular form. Likewise it lacks forms for the third person dual and plural. In circumstances which call for such forms, Old Russian typically employs the particle да 'so that' together with the appropriate form of the present tense.

9.2 Participles & the Infinitive
The present active participle make take one of two stems, -уч- or -яч-, which is added to the present tense stem of the verb. The determination of which stem is employed with a given verb may be most easily divined by comparison with the third person plural present tense form of the verb: if the vowel of the ending is -у-, then so too is the vowel of the present active participle stem; if the third person plural shows a form in -я-, then the participle likewise shows -я- in the stem. For example, нєсти 'to carry' has third person plural present нєсуть; the participle stem is therefore нєсуч-. By contrast the verb глаголати 'to speak' has third person plural глаголять, and so the participle shows the same vocalism: глаголяч-.

One should note, however, that the influence of Old Church Slavonic shows itself strongly in the participles, and texts often exhibit the OCS form of the present active participle. Thus where the native Old Russian stem would be -уч-, we frequently find the OCS form -ѫшт-; likewise in place of -яч- we frequently find the OCS form -ѧшт-. Thus Old Russian texts frequently employ нєсѫшт- where нєсуч- is expected, and глаголѩшт- for expected глаголяч-.

Moreover the masculine nominative singular form is special: -а or -я, the latter in palatal environments. This form may be applied to any verb. The following chart provides an example for each of the present tense classes outlined in Section 4.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	3rd Pl.	 	Masc. N Sg.	 	Masc. G Sg.
I	 	нєсти	 	carry	 	нєс-уть	 	нєс-а	 	нєс-уч-а
II	 	двигнути	 	move	 	двигн-уть	 	двигн-а	 	двигн-уч-а
III	 	знати	 	know	 	зна-ють	 	зна-я	 	зна-юч-а
IV	 	любити	 	love	 	любл-ять	 	любл-я	 	любл-яч-а
V	 	дати	 	give	 	дадять	 	дад-а	 	дад-уч-а
The full declension of the present active participles is discussed in Section 26.

The present passive participle is formed by means of the suffix -мъ applied to the present tense stem. This suffix is preceded by a vowel, either -о-, -є-, or -и- depending on the class of the verb. For example нєсти 'to carry' has present passive participle нєсомъ 'being carried', while глаголати 'to speak' has present passive participle глаголємъ 'being spoken'. The details of the formation are discussed in Section 32. The declension follows that of o/a-stem adjectives, as outlined in Section 12 of the following lesson.

The ending -ти characterizes the infinitive. The form of the infinitive is invariable. The final consonant of verbal roots ending in a consonant, such as the root вєд- 'lead' or рєк- 'say', often undergoes a shift when preceding the -т- of the infinitive ending: вєсти 'to lead', рєчи 'to say'.

10 Conjunctions & Particles
Many of the Old Russian texts recount historical narratives and discourse between various participants. The language employs numerous particles that serve to guide the reader or listener through the myriad shades of dependence, implication, and contrast that exist between clauses and the ideas they represent. Some particles stand independently and receive an accent of their own (proclitic), while others must generally follow an accented word (enclitic). The selection below highlights the most common conjunctions and particles, giving a sense of their English connotations and examples of their use.

а, али 'but, and': Proclitic. Contrasts two statements with one another, but with weaker adversative force than its cousin нъ listed below: И сѣдаша Кꙑи на горѣ, идєжє нꙑнѣ убозъ Боричєвъ, а Щєкъ сѣдашє на горѣ, идєжє нꙑнѣ зовється Щєковица "And Kyi settled on the hill, where now (there is) Boris's Pass, but Shek settled on the hill, where now it's called Shekovica" (Primary Chronicle). Often able to be translated as 'and': єдиномѹ имя Кꙑи, а другому Щєкъ, а трєтиєму Хоривъ "The name to one was Kyi, and to the second was Shek, and to the third was Khoriv".
ако, ꙗко, яко, ѣко 'that, so that, how, when, since, as': Proclitic. In its most basic sense, this functions as a pointer to another clause. Often that clause represents a quotation, either direct or indirect. When the quotation is indirect, ако parallels English usage of that in collocations such as He said that he was going...: Ини жє, нє съвѣдѹщє, рѣша, яко Кꙑи єсть пєрєвозьникъ бꙑлъ "And they, not knowing, said that Kyi had been a ferryman" (Primary Chronicle). But Old Russian may also introduce direct quotations with яко, a role which that does not fill in English. When the clause pointed to provides a goal or purpose, яко most closely resembles English so that. Often the clause introduced by яко serves to explain the main clause, and so яко may be rendered by English since, how, when.
ащє 'if, whether': Proclitic. This introduces a condition, serving to mark the beginning of the subordinate clause (the protasis, or clause setting up the hypothesis, in classical terminology): ащє ся въвадить вълкъ въ овьцѣ, то вꙑносить вьсе стадо "If a wolf is introduced among the sheep, then he will carry off the whole flock" (Primary Chronicle).
бо 'for, because, since': Enclitic. This conjunction marks a transition between independent clauses and usually forms the second element of the clause in which it stands. The clause containing бо typically serves to explain the reason underlying the preceding statement: "...да поиди за къняжь нашь, за Малъ." Бѣ бо имя єму Малъ "'... marry our prince, Mal.' For his name was Mal" (Primary Chronicle).
да 'that, in order that': Proclitic. This conjunction introduces a clause stating a purpose, a final result, or a command. Consider the following example: да поиди, къняжє, съ нами въ дань, да и тꙑ добудєши и мꙑ "That you go (i.e. Go!), prince, with us after tribute, so that you too find reward as we" (Primary Chronicle). Here the first instance of да marks a command, while the second marks a clause denoting the purpose or result.
жє 'on the other hand, or, and': Enclitic. This conjunction marks a weak transition between clauses: Ольга жє бяшє Кꙑєвѣ съ сꙑнъмь своимь... "And Olga was in Kiev with her son..." (Primary Chronicle). Its frequent occurrence often means that it may be left untranslated. Following the third person pronoun *и 'he' it yields the relative pronoun ижє 'he who', and it frequently accompanies indefinite pronouns such as никъто 'no one'.
и 'and; even, too'; и... и 'both... and': Proclitic. The coordinating conjunction и provides the most ubiquitous method of joining parallel entities, whether they be clauses, phrases, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and so on. The conjunction serves to set the coordinated elements side by side, creating a narrative sequence. As such it stands between the coordinated elements, following the former, preceding the latter: И възъва я Ольга къ собѣ, и рєчє имъ... "And Olga summoned them to herself, and she said to them..." (Primary Chronicle). In this example the first instance of и joins the entire statement to the preceding statement in the narrative; the second instance of и joins one clause within the statement to the other. Frequently, however, the repetition of и before each of a sequence of parallel items has the force of English both... and. The particle и also has an adverbial use within a clause, akin to English even, too, or also: въринѹша я въ яму и съ лодиєю "they threw them into the pit with the boat too" (Primary Chronicle).
ли 'or; whether'; ли... ли 'either... or': Proclitic. This particle generally introduces an option, and for this reason a sequence of items (clauses, nouns, or otherwise), each preceded by ли, has the force of English either... or. When the conjunction introduces a single clause, it generally marks a question as with English if or whether in statements such as I don't know if you are going... or I don't know whether you are going.... Unlike English if and whether, but similar to яко above, ли can mark a direct question: добра ли вꙑ чьсть? "Is the honor good for you?" (Primary Chronicle) As the reader can see, ли is not uniformly proclitic.
нє 'not'; нє... ни 'neither... nor': Proclitic. The particle нє provides simple negation in Old Russian, standing before the item it negates, and generally occurring only once in a clause. In a sequence of negated items, нє negates the first item, while ни precedes and negates all subsequent items: : нє ѣдємъ на конихъ, ни пѣши идємъ, нъ понєсѣтє нꙑ въ лодии "Neither will we ride on horses, nor will we go on foot, but carry us in the boat" (Primary Chronicle).
нъ 'but': Proclitic. This is the default adversative conjunction joining two clauses. It sets the clause in contrast to the preceding clause: нє ѣдємъ на конихъ, ни пѣши идємъ, нъ понєсѣтє нꙑ въ лодии "Neither will we ride on horses, nor will we go on foot, but carry us in the boat" (Primary Chronicle).
то 'then, so, thus': Proclitic. This forms the correlative to ащє 'if'. The particle stands at the beginning of the conclusion of a conditional statement (at the head of the main clause -- the apodosis in classical terminology, the then-clause in simpler terms): ащє ся въвадить вълкъ въ овьцѣ, то вꙑносить вьсе стадо "If a wolf is introduced among the sheep, then he will carry off the whole flock" (Primary Chronicle).
ѥгда, єгда 'when, if': Proclitic. This stands that the head of a subordinate clause: Егда жє събꙑсться прорєчєниє сихъ, сънидє на зємлю... "When their prophecy was fulfilled, he came to the earth..." (Primary Chronicle).
ѥда, єда 'surely not': Proclitic. This particle introduces a question to which the expected response is negative, or a clause introducing an unintended or undesirable result: то присълитє мужа нарочитꙑ, да въ вєлицѣ чисти поидѹ за вашь кънязь, єда нє пустять мєнє людиє Кꙑєвьстии "... then send me your best men, that I marry your prince in great honor, or surely the Kievan people will not permit me" (Primary Chronicle).

Old Russian Online
Lesson 3
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
III. External Influence on the Early Russian State
While the archaeological evidence provides us with some understanding of the breadth of cultures present in the surrounding region and the extent of the commercial networks tying them to one another, it necessarily provides incomplete information as to how the Eastern Slavs rose from this cultural milieu to obtain some measure of prominence in the 10th century AD. For this we turn to the literary record.

Our principal source for the emergence of the Eastern Slavs as a cultural and political entity distinguishing itself, often by force, from the neighboring tribes is the Russian Primary Chronicle, also known as the Nestorian Chronicle after its author, or as the Tale of Bygone Years. For the purposes of understanding the earliest period of the nascent Russian state, this text too presents numerous difficulties, not least of which is the fact that it was composed in the early 12th century, centuries removed from the earliest events of the Russian polity that it purports to record.

One of the signature events marked down in the Primary Chronicle is the episode narrating the Invitation to the Varangians. From the narrative it is clear that the author considers the Varangians to be a Scandinavian people. They had formerly resided for a time among the Eastern Slavs, demanding tribute. But the dissatisfied Slavs ousted the unwelcome lot and they were forced to return to their homeland across the Baltic. For a time the Slavs enjoyed their freedom from tribute, but the Chronicle tells that they soon began to fight amongst themselves. Ultimately the strife increased to such a point that they sought an external arbiter: they invited the Varangians back to rule over them once more and stamp out the tribal discord.

The Chronicle records these events under the year 862 AD. This marks what scholars take to be the first indications of a rising Russian state. The Chronicle describes how three brothers from among the Rus, which the text notes is a particular subgroup among the Varangians, heeded the call and came to take their place as princes of their own respective territories among the Eastern Slavs. Quickly two of the brothers died, and the surviving brother, Rjurik, gained control over their territories as well. This marks the beginning of the first ruling dynasty in Russian history. From this lone Scandinavian prince the first several generations of Russian princes draw their heritage. But as we see from the development of the Chronicle, within a couple generations the names of the rulers have dropped their Scandinavian appearance in favor of clearly Slavic names, beginning with Svjatoslav, son of Igor, in turn son of Rjurik.

One of the principal questions, therefore, surrounding the nascent Russian state is what exactly was the nature of the relation between the Scandinavians and the Eastern Slavs as the Rus came to rule over them. After the purported arrival of the Scandinavian princes, to what degree did these foreign-born nobles assimilate into the Eastern Slavic culture? When does the term Rus truly cease to apply solely to an imported gentry and begin to apply to a uniform culture of Eastern Slavs as distinct from other ethnicities in the region? In seeking to answer these questions, we must understand something of the mix of cultures surrounding the Eastern Slavs, as well as the particular interaction with the Scandinavians and the early use of the term Rus.

III.i Surrounding Peoples
The region between the Carpathians and the Urals during the 9th and 10th centuries was surely not inhabited only, nor even predominantly, by the Eastern Slavs. From the 7th century BC onward Greek and Latin sources speak of the Scythians, an Iranian people, above the northern shores of the Black Sea. They in turn yielded to the Sarmatians, another group arriving from the Iranian-speaking expanses of the Near East. By the 4th century AD we find that the Goths, a Germanic people, have moved into this region. But with the encroachment of the nomadic Huns driving in from the east, the Goths pushed west with disastrous consequences for the Roman Empire.

A similar story holds for the following centuries, with the Eurasian steppe proving as effective for the movement of peoples and invading armies as for the transport of fine silks and precious metals. The Huns in their turn were displaced by the Avars, a Turkic people who likewise swept in across the steppe. But by the 7th century this group too was pushed aside by the newly arrived Khazars. Their newly founded dominion, or khaganate, sat astride the northern shores of the Black and Caspian Seas. As such, Kiev found itself subject to Khazar influence, although it seems that this relationship showed more signs of mutual benefit through commerce than subjugation through strife. Though the Khazars were in origin a Turkic people, their seat of power Itil, at the mouth of the Volga on the Caspian shore, developed into a multicultural hub of regional trade. The ruling dynasty ultimately adopted Judaism as its official religion, in stark contrast to the wave of Christianity that emanated from Byzantium and ultimately engulfed early Russia.

Nor does the region become any more homogenous as we move northward. Spread throughout the forested regions of the north central plain we encounter numerous vestiges of Finno-Ugric tribes. Along the Kama river we find mentioned the Permians. Near the confluence of the Oka and Volga rivers early documents locate a tribe called the Meria. The Vesh, also a tribe of the Finno-Ugric family, inhabit the area surrounding the source of the Volga in the central Uplands. To the west, where the Baltic coast gradually begins to rise northward, sources place the Chud, probably to be identified with the Estonians. The many Finno-Ugric tribes left their impression on the Old Russian language and the placenames of the region.

III.ii Scandinavians
Scholars generally agree that, in this earliest period of the dawn of Russian history, no people had a more profound and enduring impact than the Scandinavians. However the nature and scope of that impact has incited virulent scholarly debate that has only recently begun to subside. We have already seen that the Scandinavians early injected themselves into the burgeoning trade that was rising throughout Eastern Europe and the Eurasian Steppe. Archaeological finds confirm beyond doubt the presence of Scandinavian traders as early as the beginning of the 9th century, if not before.

A sober reading of the archaeological evidence admits that the Scandinavians maintained an early and consistent presence within the Eastern European forested lands and their waterways. But they were clearly one among many different ethnicities taking advantage of the natural bounty of the region, together with the rising trade network in the 8th and 9th centuries AD. Nevertheless artifacts and burial practices show that Scandinavians occupied an important place among these various ethnicities: often, if not themselves the founders, they were present close to the founding of many of the major trading outposts along the Baltic, the inland lakes, and the waterways. And their skill at mercantile enterprise greased the works of the nascent trading economy.

Where the true debate arises is in the prominence the Old Russian literary accounts afford the Scandinavians. In its most heated form, the debate for decades divided the scholarly community into "Normanist" and "anti-Normanist" camps: the former assigned to the Scandinavians a primary impetus for the formation of the emerging Russian state, while the latter largely rejected any notable influence whatsoever of Scandinavians on the Eastern Slavic peoples. In particular the debate surrounds the terms Rus (Rusĭ) and Varangian (Varjagi) and whether these terms should be taken to apply (solely) to Scandinavians or (also) to Slavs. The Old Russian Primary Chronicle recounts how the Rus and Varangians were Scandinavian people "from across the (Baltic) sea". Thus one of the principal documents on which scholars base their understanding of the early East Slavs makes a distinction between the Rus and Varangians, on the one hand, and the native East Slavic culture on the other. The implication is that, not only are the Rus a different people, but the are from a very different place.

But as the Old Russian narrative continues we see a shift in the use of the term Rus. Where in the initial invitation it clearly provided, from the perspective of the Slavic author, a differentiation between "us" and "them", its subsequent use blurs that distinction. As the story progresses, Rus seems to refer to groups which, although they certainly contained an element derived from that original Varangian influx, must also have contained members of local heritage. That is, the term Rus eventually applies to people who must be, and must always have been, Eastern Slavs.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The following extract, together with those from Lessons 4-7, form one continuous narrative. The narrative stems from a particular self-contained episode within the Primary Chronicle. The particular edition of the text we follow here is reproduced in Charles E. Gribble's excellent collection Medieval Slavic Texts. Volume 1: Old and Middle Russian Texts (1973), pages 158-160.

The episode below recounts the events surrounding the death of the prince Igor, son of Rjurik, and at that time ruler of Kiev. We find that Igor's wife Olga, angered by the death of her husband, seeks to exact revenge. The passage contains a description of the journey of the Derevlians as they travel to the court of Olga. We find a brief description of some of the geographic features of the region. The events are listed under the year 945 AD in the chronicle. The excerpt below lists lines 1-38 from Gribble's text.

1 - В лѣто ,ѕ. у. н г.

 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
у -- number; <у> four hundred -- four hundred
н -- number; <н> fifty -- fifty
г -- number; <г> three -- three

2-5 - В се же лѣто рекоша дружина игореви ѡтроци свѣньлъжи исодѣли сѧ суть ѡружьємъ и порты а мꙑ нази. поиди кнѧжє с нами в дань да и ты добудеши и мꙑ.
 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- year
рекоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
дружина -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- the retinue
игореви -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Игорь> Igor, Ingvar (Scandinavian name) -- to Igor
ѡтроци -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <отрокъ> boy, servant -- retainers
свѣньлъжи -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <свѣньлжь> of Sveinald, relating to Sveinald, Sveinald's -- Sveinald's
исодѣли -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <изодѣꙗти сѧ, -одѣѭ сѧ, -одѣѥши сѧ> be dressed up, be adorned -- clothed
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- are
ѡружьємъ -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <орѫжьє> weapon, sword -- with swords
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
порты -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <пъртꙑ> (pl.) dress, clothes, garments -- garments
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
мꙑ -- pronoun; nominative plural of <азъ> I -- we
нази -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <нагъ> naked -- naked
поиди -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- Go
кнѧжє -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
нами -- pronoun; instrumental plural of <азъ> I -- us
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- after
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- that
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
ты -- pronoun; nominative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
добудеши -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <добꙑти, -бѫдѫ, -бѫдєши> get, attain -- obtain (it)
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- as
мꙑ -- pronoun; nominative plural of <азъ> I -- we

5-7 - послуша ихъ игорь. иде в дерева в дань и примꙑшлѧше къ первои дани насилѧше имъ и мужи єго.
 Collapse All
послуша -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <послѹшати, -аѭ, -аѥши> hear, listen -- heeded
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- them
игорь -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Игорь> Igor, Ingvar (Scandinavian name) -- Igor
иде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- he went
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
дерева -- proper noun; masculine accusative plural of <Дєрєвꙑ> Dereva (placename) -- Dereva
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- after
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
примꙑшлѧше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <примꙑслити, -шлѭ, -слиши> devise, contrive, invent; add to, increase -- he added
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
первои -- adjective; feminine dative singular of <пръвъ> first -- the first
дани -- noun; feminine dative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
насилѧше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <насилити, -лѭ, -лиши> do violence to, force, oppress (w. dat.) -- oppressed
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- them
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
мужи -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- men
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his

7-11 - возьємавъ дань поиде въ градъ свои. идуще же ємѹ въспѧть размꙑсливъ рече дружинѣ своєи идѣте съ данью домови, а я возъвращю сѧ похожю и єще.
 Collapse All
возьємавъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <възьмати, -ємл҄ѭ, -ємл҄ѥши> take, take up -- Having seized
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- the tribute
поиде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- he went
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
градъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- city
свои -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
идуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- having come # Should be dative singular to agree with pronoun; here frozen as gerund.
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
ємѹ -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- ... # Together with the preceding participle, this should form a dative absolute. The construction is not absolute, however, since this pronoun refers to Igor, who is also the subject of the main clause.
въспѧть -- adverb; <въспѧть> back, toward the back, in reverse, in return -- back
размꙑсливъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <размꙑслити, -шлѭ, -слиши> think, consider -- (and) having changed (his) mind
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- he said
дружинѣ -- noun; feminine dative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- to... retinue
своєи -- adjective; feminine dative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
идѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- Go
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
данью -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <дань> tribute -- the tribute
домови -- noun; masculine dative singular of <домъ> house -- home
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
я -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
возъвращю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <възвратити, -штѫ, -тиши> give back; (refl.) come back -- I will turn back
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
похожю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <походити, -ждѫ, -диши> go, go around -- (and) will walk back
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- yet
єще -- adverb; <єщє> still -- again

11-13 - пусти дружину свою домови. съ маломъ же дружинꙑ возъврати сѧ желаꙗ больша имѣньꙗ.
 Collapse All
пусти -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <пѹстити, -штѫ, -стиши> allow, let, free; send (away) -- He sent
дружину -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- retinue
свою -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
домови -- noun; masculine dative singular of <домъ> house -- home
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
маломъ -- adjective used as substantive; neuter instrumental singular of <малъ> small, young -- a small (part)
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- and
дружинꙑ -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- of (his) retinue
возъврати -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <възвратити, -штѫ, -тиши> give back; (refl.) come back -- he returned
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
желаꙗ -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <жєлати, -лаѭ, -лаѥши> desire, want, wish for -- desiring
больша -- comparative adjective; neuter accusative plural of <бол҄ьи> bigger, more -- more
имѣньꙗ -- noun; neuter accusative plural of <имѣньє> having, possession, property -- possessions

13-19 - слꙑшавше же деревлѧне ꙗко ѡпѧть идеть. сдумавше со кнѧземъ своимъ маломъ, аще сѧ въвадить волкъ в овцѣ, то вꙑносить все стадо, аще не ѹбьють єго. тако и се -- аще не ѹбьємъ єго, то все нꙑ погубить -- послаша к нему глаголюще, почто идеши ѡпѧть. поималъ єси всю дань.
 Collapse All
слꙑшавше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- heard # With this and the following participle, note the frequent use of participles in Old Russian in place of a finite (conjugated) verb form.
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- that
ѡпѧть -- adverb; <опѧть> back -- back
идеть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- he (was) coming
сдумавше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <съдѹмати, -аѭ, -аѥши> deliberate, consider, take counsel -- (and) sought counsel
со -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
кнѧземъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
своимъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their
маломъ -- proper noun; masculine instrumental singular of <Малъ> Mal (name of a prince) -- Mal
аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- If
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- itself
въвадить -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <въвадити, -важдѫ, -вадиши> join; (refl.) introduce oneself, enter -- introduces
волкъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <влъкъ> wolf -- a wolf
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- among
овцѣ -- noun; feminine accusative plural of <овьца> sheep -- the sheep
то -- conjunction; <то> but, then, therefore -- then
вꙑносить -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <вꙑносити, -шѫ, -сиши> carry off, make off with -- make away with
все -- adjective; neuter accusative singular of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- the whole
стадо -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <стадо> herd -- flock
аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- if
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
ѹбьють -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- they do... kill
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- it
тако -- adverb; <тако> thus, in this way -- So
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- also
се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter nominative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- (with) this
аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- if
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
ѹбьємъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- we do... kill
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- him
то -- conjunction; <то> but, then, therefore -- then
все -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all # Note the masculine plural ending -е instead of the expected -ѣ or -я.
нꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <азъ> I -- us
погубить -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <погѹбити, -блѭ, -биши> destroy -- will destroy
послаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- They sent
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
нему -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- him
глаголюще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- saying
почто -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for + interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- For what
идеши -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- do you return
ѡпѧть -- adverb; <опѧть> back -- ...
поималъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <поимати, -ѥмл҄ѭ, -ѥмл҄ѥши> take, take away -- taken
єси -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- you have
всю -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- the tribute

19-21 - и не послуша ихъ игорь. и вꙑшедше изъ града изъкоръстѣнѧ деревлене ѹбиша игорѧ и дружину єго, бѣ бо ихъ мало.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- But
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
послуша -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <послѹшати, -аѭ, -аѥши> hear, listen -- did... heed
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- them
игорь -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Игорь> Igor, Ingvar (Scandinavian name) -- Igor
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
вꙑшедше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <вънити, -идѫ, -идєши> go into, enter -- having set forth
изъ -- preposition; <из> (w. gen.) from, out of -- from
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
изъкоръстѣнѧ -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Искоростѣнь> Iskorosten (name of a city) -- Iskorosten
деревлене -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
ѹбиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- killed
игорѧ -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Игорь> Igor, Ingvar (Scandinavian name) -- Igor
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
дружину -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- retinue
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there were
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- of them
мало -- adjective used as substantive; neuter nominative singular of <малъ> small, young -- (just) a few

21-23 - и погребєнъ бꙑсть игорь. єсть могила єго ѹ искоръстѣнѧ града в деревѣхъ и до сего дне.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
погребєнъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <погрєти, -грєбѫ, -грєбєши> bury -- buried # Note the use of the past passive participle in a true passive construction
бꙑсть -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
игорь -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Игорь> Igor, Ingvar (Scandinavian name) -- Igor
єсть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is
могила -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <могꙑла> grave, tomb, burial mound -- grave # Note the use of -и- after a velar consonant where -ъӏ- is expected
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- near
искоръстѣнѧ -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Искоростѣнь> Iskorosten (name of a city) -- Iskorosten
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
деревѣхъ -- proper noun; masculine locative plural of <Дєрєвꙑ> Dereva (placename) -- Dereva
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- even
до -- preposition; <до> (w. gen.) to, up to; (with numerals) about -- up to
сего -- demonstrative adjective; masculine genitive singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
дне -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <дьнь> day -- day

23-26 - вольга же бѧше в києвѣ съ сꙑнъмъ съ дѣтьскомъ свѧтославомъ и кормилець єго асмудъ. воєвода бѣ свѣнелдъ, тоже ѡтьць мистишинъ.
 Collapse All
вольга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga # Note the insertion of в- before initial о-.
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
бѧше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
києвѣ -- proper noun; masculine locative singular of <Кꙑєвъ> Kiev, Kyiv (name of a city) -- Kiev
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
сꙑнъмъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <сꙑнъ> son -- (her) son
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- ...
дѣтьскомъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <дѣтьскъ> childish -- the child
свѧтославомъ -- proper noun; masculine instrumental singular of <Свѧтославъ> Svjatoslav, Svyatoslav, Sviatoslav (name of a prince) -- Svjatoslav # Note here and frequently elsewhere in the text the back jer -ъ in the instrumental singular ending, rather than the expected front jer -ь: -омь. Such alternation is frequent both in Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic texts. One must be careful not to confuse such forms with the dative plural.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- as well as
кормилець -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <кръмильць> tutor, teacher, pedagogue -- tutor
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
асмудъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Асмудъ> Asmud, Asmund, Asmundr (Scandinavian name) -- Asmund
воєвода -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <воєвода> (military) commander, vojevoda -- (His) commander
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
свѣнелдъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Свѣньлдъ> Sveinald (Scandinavian name) -- Sveinald
тоже -- conjunction; <тожє> also, and -- ...
ѡтьць -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <отьць> father -- father
мистишинъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <мистишинъ> of Mistisha, relating to Mistisha, Mistisha's -- of Mistisha

26-29 - рѣша же деревлѧне, се кнѧзѧ ѹбихомъ рускаго. поимемъ жену єго вольгу за кнѧзь свои малъ и свѧтослава, и створимъ єму ꙗко же хощемъ.
 Collapse All
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
се -- interjection; <сє> lo, behold -- Lo!
кнѧзѧ -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- the... prince
ѹбихомъ -- verb; 1st person plural aorist of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- We have killed
рускаго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <рѹсьскъ> Rus (Rus'), of the Rus, relating to the Rus, Rusian, Russian -- Russian
поимемъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <поѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take, seize -- (Let us) take # Either a present form used with imperative force, or поимемъ a variant spelling of поимѣмъ
жену -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <жєна> woman, wife -- wife
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
вольгу -- proper noun; feminine accusative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- for
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
свои -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- our # Note the use of the 3rd person reflexive pronominal adjective when the referent is 1st person
малъ -- proper noun; masculine accusative singular of <Малъ> Mal (name of a prince) -- Mal
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- as well as
свѧтослава -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Свѧтославъ> Svjatoslav, Svyatoslav, Sviatoslav (name of a prince) -- Svjatoslav # This is a second direct object of поимємъ, parallel to жену. Note the use of the genitive instead of the accusative for Свѧтослава, whereas we find the expected accusative form Малъ after за.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
створимъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- we will do
єму -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- with him
ꙗко же -- conjunction; <ꙗкожє> as, like, than, so as to -- as
хощемъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- we wish

29-31 - и послаша деревлѧне лучьшиє мужи числомъ .к. въ лодьи к ользѣ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
послаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
лучьшиє -- comparative adjective; masculine accusative plural of <лѹчьи, лѹчє, лѹчьши> better -- (their) best
мужи -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- men
числомъ -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <число> number -- by number
к -- number; <к> twenty -- 20
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
лодьи -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- a boat
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
ользѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga

31-35 - и присташа подъ боричєвꙑмъ в лодьи. бѣ бо тогда вода текущи въздолѣ горꙑ києвьскиꙗ и на подольи не сѣдѧху людьє, но на горѣ. градъ же бѣ києвъ, идеже єсть нꙑнѣ дворъ гордѧтинъ и никифоровъ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
присташа -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <пристати, -станѫ, -станєши> stand near; be near, be present; come, arrive -- they arrived
подъ -- preposition; <подъ> (w. acc.) under, below (object of motion); (w. instr.) under, below (location) -- below
боричєвꙑмъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine instrumental singular of <боричєвъ> of Boris, relating to Boris; (subst. m.) the Borichev (a trail between upper and lower reaches of Kiev) -- the Borichev
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
лодьи -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- a boat
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- For
тогда -- adverb; <тогда> then -- at that time
вода -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <вода> water -- water
текущи -- participle; feminine nominative singular of <тєшти, тєкѫ, тєчєши> run, rush, flow; follow, pursue -- flowing
въздолѣ -- preposition; <въздолѣ> (w. gen.) below, at the bottom of -- at the foot
горꙑ -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <гора> mountain -- of the... hill
києвьскиꙗ -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <кыѥвьскъ> of Kiev, of Kyiv, Kievan -- Kievan
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- at
подольи -- noun; neuter locative singular of <подольѥ> valley, vale; base, foundation -- the base
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
сѣдѧху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <сѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> sit, remain -- had not settled
людьє -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- the people
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
горѣ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <гора> mountain -- the hill
градъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- a city
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
києвъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Кыѥвъ> Kiev, Kyiv -- Kiev
идеже -- adverb; <идє> where; since; however + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- where
єсть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is
нꙑнѣ -- adverb; <нꙑн҄ꙗ, нꙑнѣ> now -- now
дворъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the court
гордѧтинъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <гордꙗтинъ> of Gordjata, of Gordyata -- of Gordjata
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
никифоровъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <никифоровъ> of Nicephorus -- Nicephorus

35-38 - а дворъ кнѧжь бѧше в городѣ идеже єсть дворъ демьстиковъ за свѧтою богородицею надъ горою. дворъ теремꙑи, бѣ бо ту теремъ каменъ.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- But
дворъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the... court
кнѧжь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <кънѧжь> of a prince, relating to a prince, princely -- prince's
бѧше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
городѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city # Note the alternation, within a few lines, between градъ and городъ.
идеже -- adverb; <идє> where; since; however + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- where
єсть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is
дворъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the court
демьстиковъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <деместиковъ> of the domesticus, relating to the domesticus (originally within Byzantine tradition a term denoting the leader of certain guard units; later a term applied to certain civil and ecclesiastica -- of the domesticus
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- behind
свѧтою -- adjective; feminine instrumental singular of <свѧтъ> holy, blessed -- the Holy
богородицею -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <богородица> mother of God -- Mother of God # Likely the title of a church.
надъ -- preposition; <надъ> (w. acc. or instr.) over, above -- above
горою -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <гора> mountain -- the hill
дворъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- (It is) the... court
теремꙑи -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <трѣмьнъ> of a tower, relating to a tower, relating to a castle -- tower
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
ту -- adverb; <тѹ> there; then -- there
теремъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <трѣмъ> tower, castle; home, residence -- a tower
каменъ -- noun; masculine genitive plural of <камꙑ> stone, rock -- of stones

Lesson Text
1 - В лѣто ,ѕ. у. н г.

2-5 - В се же лѣто рекоша дружина игореви ѡтроци свѣньлъжи исодѣли сѧ суть ѡружьємъ и порты а мꙑ нази. поиди кнѧжє с нами в дань да и ты добудеши и мꙑ. 5-7 - послуша ихъ игорь. иде в дерева в дань и примꙑшлѧше къ первои дани насилѧше имъ и мужи єго. 7-11 - возьємавъ дань поиде въ градъ свои. идуще же ємѹ въспѧть размꙑсливъ рече дружинѣ своєи идѣте съ данью домови, а я возъвращю сѧ похожю и єще. 11-13 - пусти дружину свою домови. съ маломъ же дружинꙑ возъврати сѧ желаꙗ больша имѣньꙗ. 13-19 - слꙑшавше же деревлѧне ꙗко ѡпѧть идеть. сдумавше со кнѧземъ своимъ маломъ, аще сѧ въвадить волкъ в овцѣ, то вꙑносить все стадо, аще не ѹбьють єго. тако и се -- аще не ѹбьємъ єго, то все нꙑ погубить -- послаша к нему глаголюще, почто идеши ѡпѧть. поималъ єси всю дань. 19-21 - и не послуша ихъ игорь. и вꙑшедше изъ града изъкоръстѣнѧ деревлене ѹбиша игорѧ и дружину єго, бѣ бо ихъ мало. 21-23 - и погребєнъ бꙑсть игорь. єсть могила єго ѹ искоръстѣнѧ града в деревѣхъ и до сего дне. 23-26 - вольга же бѧше в києвѣ съ сꙑнъмъ съ дѣтьскомъ свѧтославомъ и кормилець єго асмудъ. воєвода бѣ свѣнелдъ, тоже ѡтьць мистишинъ. 26-29 - рѣша же деревлѧне, се кнѧзѧ ѹбихомъ рускаго. поимемъ жену єго вольгу за кнѧзь свои малъ и свѧтослава, и створимъ єму ꙗко же хощемъ. 29-31 - и послаша деревлѧне лучьшиє мужи числомъ .к. въ лодьи к ользѣ. 31-35 - и присташа подъ боричєвꙑмъ в лодьи. бѣ бо тогда вода текущи въздолѣ горꙑ києвьскиꙗ и на подольи не сѣдѧху людьє, но на горѣ. градъ же бѣ києвъ, идеже єсть нꙑнѣ дворъ гордѧтинъ и никифоровъ. 35-38 - а дворъ кнѧжь бѧше в городѣ идеже єсть дворъ демьстиковъ за свѧтою богородицею надъ горою. дворъ теремꙑи, бѣ бо ту теремъ каменъ.
Translation
1 In the year 6453.
2-4 In this year the retinue said to Igor, "Sveinald's retainers are clothed with swords and garments, but we are naked. Go, prince, with us after tribute, that you obtain (it) as we." 5-7 Igor heeded them: he went to Dereva after tribute, and he added to the first tribute. He and his men oppressed them. 7-11 Having seized the tribute, he returned to his city. Having come back (and) having changed his mind, he said to his retinue, "Go home with the tribute. But I will turn back (and) will walk back yet again." 11-13 He sent his retinue home and with a small (part) of his retinue he returned, desiring more possessions. 13-19 But the Derevlians heard that he (was) coming back, (and) sought counsel with their prince Mal, "If a wolf introduces itself among the sheep, then it will make away with the whole flock, if they do not kill it. So also (with) this: if we do not kill him, he will destroy us all." They sent to him, saying, "For what do you return? You have taken all the tribute." 19-21 But Igor did not heed them. And having set forth from the city Iskorosten, the Derevlians killed Igor and his retinue, for there were (just) a few of them. 21-23 And Igor was buried. His grave is near the city Iskorosten in Dereva even to this day. 23-26 But Olga was in Kiev with her son, the child Svjatoslav, as well as his tutor Asmund. His commander was Sveinald, father of Mistisha. 26-29 And the Derevlians said, "Lo! We have killed the Russian prince. (Let us) take his wife Olga for our prince Mal, as well as Svjatoslav, and we will do with him as we wish." 29-31 And the Derevlians sent their best men, 20 by number, in a boat to Olga. 31-35 And they arrived below the Borichev in the boat. For at that time there was water flowing at the foot of the Kievan hill and the people had not settled at the base, but rather on the hill. And there was a city, Kiev, where the court of Gordjata and Nicephorus now is. 35-38 But the prince's court was in the city, where the court of the domesticus is behind the Holy Mother of God above the hill. (It is) the tower court, for there was a tower of stones.
Grammar
11 i- and u-Stem Nouns
After the o, jo- and a, ja-declensions the next most numerous class of nouns is the i-stem declension. Not only does it contain a large number of very common words, but over time words from less well-represented declensions often had a tendency to adopt endings from the i-declension. The u-declension by contrast contains very few words; the words it does contain, however, often come from the inherited core vocabulary of the language.

11.1 i-Stem Nouns
The i-stem declension ultimately derives its name from its role as representing the reflexes of the original declension of short-*i-stem nouns in Proto-Indo-European. But by a lucky twist of fate, or of historical phonology, the name remains apropos due to the fact that -и appears in a large number of the declensional endings, and those endings which do not contain -и often contain -ь- [-ĭ-]: in particular we see this in the dative plural, where we found the historical thematic vowel in the twofold declension. Thus, in contrast to the twofold or o, jo-declension, the name of the i-declension serves as a useful mnemonic device. Less helpful is the alternate terminology employed by some scholars: the simple nominal declension.

For the most part the nouns of the i-declension are feminine, though some masculine nouns also belong to this declension. For example, гость 'guest' and господь 'lord' are masculine i-stems, while вьсь 'village' and кѹпѣль 'bath' are feminine. The feminine noun кость 'bone' and the masculine noun путь 'way, path' serve to illustrate the declension.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	кость	 	кости	 	кости	 	 	 	 	 	путь	 	пути	 	путьє
A	 	кость	 	кости	 	кости	 	 	 	 	 	путь	 	пути	 	пути
G	 	кости	 	костью	 	костьи	 	 	 	 	 	пути	 	путью	 	путьи
L	 	кости	 	костью	 	костьхъ	 	 	 	 	 	пути	 	путью	 	путьхъ
D	 	кости	 	костьма	 	костьмъ	 	 	 	 	 	пути	 	путьма	 	путьмъ
I	 	костью	 	костьма	 	костьми	 	 	 	 	 	путьмь	 	путьма	 	путьми
V	 	кости	 	кости	 	кости	 	 	 	 	 	пути	 	пути	 	путьє
As we have seen numerous times in other declensions, the rules pertaining to strong/weak and tense jers apply. For example the front jer in the instrumental singular костью [kostĭju] is tense, so we often find the sequence -ĭj- vocalized as -и-: костию. Moreover, in the instrumental singular путьмь, the first (penultimate) jer falls in strong position, so that we occasionally find this form written as путємь. Similarly for other forms throughout the paradigm.

One also encounters situations in which i-stem nouns adopt endings from the twofold declension: whereas господь 'lord' typically shows the form господи in both genitive and dative singular, we occasionally find twofold forms господа and господу, respectively.

11.2 u-Stem Nouns
The u-declension consists of a handful of nouns, exclusively masculine, which maintain reflexes of the original Proto-Indo-European *u-stem nominal inflection. For example, the following masculine nouns belong to the u-declension: домъ 'house', чинъ 'order', станъ 'camp'. In Indo-European terms, the inflectional endings of this declension broke down into two types: those forms showing stem-final *-u- and those showing stem-final *-oō(t) or *-eō(t). The former provides the zero-grade of the root, the latter the *o- and *e-grades, respectively. In the linguistic evolution of Common Slavic we find that tautosyllabic *oō and *eō yield *u, while in heterosyllabic position they yield *-ov-. The latter occurs in particular before endings beginning with a vowel. This distinction provides for the characteristic alternation between endings showing -у- and endings showing -ов- that runs through the u-declension paradigm.

The masculine noun сынъ 'son' serves to illustrate the inflectional pattern followed by u-stem nouns.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	сынъ	 	сынꙑ	 	сыновє
A	 	сынъ	 	сынꙑ	 	сынꙑ
G	 	сыну	 	сынову	 	сыновъ
L	 	сыну	 	сынову	 	сынъхъ
D	 	сынови	 	сынъма	 	сынъмъ
I	 	сынъмь	 	сынъма	 	сынъми
V	 	сыну	 	сынꙑ	 	сыновє
In this declension we find one of the few instances in which Old Russian texts appear more conservative than those of Old Church Slavonic. In particular, as is typical of Old Russian declensions, we see the Proto-Indo-European thematic vowel appear in the dative plural: сын-ъ-мъ, where the penultimate -ъ- is the regular Common Slavic reflex of PIE short *-u-, and hence also in both Old Church Slavonic and Old Russian. But in this particular form, we never find this reflex; rather we always find OCS сꙑномъ. We would expect such a form in both Old Church Slavonic and Old Russian, either by virtue of the fact that the penultimate back jer is in strong position and so would vocalize as -о-, or because, owing to the relatively small number of u-stem nouns, we might expect conflation with the endings of the much more common o-stem nouns. In Old Russian we do in fact find the dative plural сꙑномъ alongside сꙑнъмъ for just this reason (whichever of the two choices it happens to be); but in Old Church Slavonic, as it happens, the more archaic reflex never appears in the extant texts. This applies as well for the instrumental singular сꙑнъмь: this archaic form appears in Old Russian, but never in Old Church Slavonic, which retains only the fully vocalized form сꙑномь.

As the above discussion might lead one to believe, Old Russian texts commonly show u-stem nouns with forms inflected along the lines of o-stems: thus the u-stem домъ 'home' shows an o-stem dative singular дому alongside the normal u-stem dative домови. This process works in both directions, so that the proper name Ольгъ 'Oleg', an o-stem noun, shows dative singular Ольгови.

Moreover, in a palatalized environment the sequence -jov- often fronts to -jev-. Thus instead of *конови (unattested) as an alternate to the expected dative коню 'to the horse', we find конєви; similarly we find воробиєвє 'sparrows' for the nominative plural of воробии. In addition, we even find the -ов- suffix inserted as if part of the nominal stem before another full ending: e.g. dative plural сыновомъ 'to the sons'.

12 o- and a-Stem Adjectives
Adjectives in Old Russian fall broadly into two categories: definite and indefinite, sometimes called long-form and short-form, or compound and simple, respectively. The indefinite category is the more basic in the sense that its formation is simpler, while the definite category derives its forms from a process of composition. In the broadest terms, the indefinite adjectives employ the endings of o- and jo-stem nouns for masculine and neuter forms, while they employ the endings of a- and ja-stem nouns for feminine forms. By contrast, definite adjectives employ not only the endings of the indefinite adjectives just described, but they append to these corresponding forms of the third person pronoun *и.

This section treats the indefinite adjectives. As with the nouns whose endings they employ, the indefinite adjectives fall into two basic classes: hard and soft stems.

12.1 Hard Indefinite Adjectives
The hard indefinite adjectives, or hard simple twofold adjectives, take their masculine and neuter forms from the o-stem nominal paradigm as outlined in Section 3.1 and their feminine forms from the a-stem nominal paradigm as outlined in Section 3.2. The adjective добро 'good' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	добръ	 	добро	 	добра
A	 	добръ	 	добро	 	добру
G	 	добра	 	добра	 	добры
L	 	добрѣ	 	добрѣ	 	добрѣ
D	 	добру	 	добру	 	добрѣ
I	 	добромь	 	добромь	 	доброю
V	 	добръ	 	добро	 	добра
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	добра	 	добрѣ	 	добрѣ
A	 	добра	 	добрѣ	 	добрѣ
G	 	добру	 	добру	 	добру
L	 	добру	 	добру	 	добру
D	 	доброма	 	доброма	 	добрама
I	 	доброма	 	доброма	 	добрама
V	 	добра	 	добрѣ	 	добрѣ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	добри	 	добра	 	добры
A	 	добры	 	добра	 	добры
G	 	добръ	 	добръ	 	добръ
L	 	добрѣхъ	 	добрѣхъ	 	добрахъ
D	 	добромъ	 	добромъ	 	добрамъ
I	 	добры	 	добры	 	добрами
V	 	добри	 	добра	 	добры
As with the twofold nominal declension, palatalization of stem-final velars occurs in those positions where historically they followed a front vowel. For example the adjective вєликъ 'great' has masculine genitive singular вєлика, but locative singular вєлицѣ and nominative plural вєлици. Moreover, note that the vocative of adjectives always remains identical to the corresponding nominative form; there is no special vocative ending in the singular, unlike the twofold declension of nouns.

12.2 Soft Indefinite Adjectives
The soft indefinite adjectives, or soft simple twofold adjectives, by contrast, derive their masculine and neuter forms from the jo-stem nominal paradigm of Section 3.1 and their feminine forms from the ja-stem nominal paradigm of Section 3.2. The adjective син҄ь 'blue' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	син҄ь	 	син҄є	 	син҄я
A	 	син҄ь	 	син҄є	 	син҄ю
G	 	син҄я	 	син҄я	 	син҄ѣ
L	 	син҄и	 	син҄и	 	син҄и
D	 	син҄ю	 	син҄ю	 	син҄и
I	 	син҄ємь	 	син҄ємь	 	син҄єю
V	 	син҄ь	 	син҄є	 	син҄я
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	син҄я	 	син҄и	 	син҄и
A	 	син҄я	 	син҄и	 	син҄и
G	 	син҄ю	 	син҄ю	 	син҄ю
L	 	син҄ю	 	син҄ю	 	син҄ю
D	 	син҄єма	 	син҄єма	 	син҄яма
I	 	син҄єма	 	син҄єма	 	син҄яма
V	 	син҄я	 	син҄и	 	син҄и
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	син҄и	 	син҄я	 	син҄ѣ
A	 	син҄ѣ	 	син҄я	 	син҄ѣ
G	 	син҄ь	 	син҄ь	 	син҄ь
L	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄яхъ
D	 	син҄ємъ	 	син҄ємъ	 	син҄ямъ
I	 	син҄и	 	син҄и	 	син҄ями
V	 	син҄и	 	син҄я	 	син҄ѣ
Some adjective stems end in a front glide, such as божи- [božĭj-] 'of god, divine'. In such instances the masculine nominative singular ending -ь [-ĭ] combines with the glide to yield -и: божьи [božĭjĭ], or due to the tense position of the first jer, божии.

13 Pronominal Declension
The first introduction in this series to the more general paradigm of pronominal declension was with the third person pronoun *и 'he'. There we first encountered the surest marker of pronominal declension, namely the masculine and neuter genitive singular ending in -го. Old Russian contains a wide range of pronouns, all of which employ this genitive ending and many of the remaining features exhibited by the third person pronoun. Moreover several adjectives, both possessive and other, follow the pronominal declension rather than the twofold declension of nouns. Generally speaking, pronouns and adjectives exhibiting the pronominal declension fall into two categories: hard and soft, based largely on whether the genitive singular ending -го is preceded by the vowel -о- or -є-, respectively.

13.1 Hard Stem Pronominal Declension
The hard stem pronominal declension is characterized by a masculine and neuter genitive singular in -ого. The same declension also typically exhibits a genitive and locative plural in -ѣхъ for all genders. The distal deictic pronoun онъ 'that one there' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	онъ	 	оно	 	она
A	 	онъ	 	оно	 	ону
G	 	оного	 	оного	 	оноѣ, оноя
L	 	ономь	 	ономь	 	онои
D	 	оному	 	оному	 	онои
I	 	онѣмь	 	онѣмь	 	оною
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	она	 	онѣ	 	онѣ
A	 	она	 	онѣ	 	онѣ
G	 	оною	 	оною	 	оною
L	 	оною	 	оною	 	оною
D	 	онѣма	 	онѣма	 	онѣма
I	 	онѣма	 	онѣма	 	онѣма
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	они	 	она	 	оны
A	 	оны	 	она	 	оны
G	 	онѣхъ	 	онѣхъ	 	онѣхъ
L	 	онѣхъ	 	онѣхъ	 	онѣхъ
D	 	онѣмъ	 	онѣмъ	 	онѣмъ
I	 	онѣми	 	онѣми	 	онѣми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The common deictic pronoun тъ 'that one' also declines according to the hard stem pronominal declension, as well as the correlative demonstratives овъ... овъ 'this... that, the one... the other' and овъ... инъ 'this one here... that one there'. The adjective мъногъ 'much, many' follows the same declension, showing the effects of second palatalization in certain case forms, such as masculine dative plural мънозѣмъ and instrumental plural мънозѣми.

13.2 Soft Stem Pronominal Declension
A masculine and neuter genitive singular in -єго characterizes the soft stem pronominal declension. This declension also typically exhibits a genitive and locative plural in -ихъ for all genders. The proximal deictic pronoun сь 'this one here' illustrates the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	сь, сьи	 	сє, сьє	 	си, сия
A	 	сь	 	сє, сьє	 	сю, сью
G	 	сєго	 	сєго	 	сєѣ, сєя
L	 	сємь	 	сємь	 	сєи
D	 	сєму	 	сєму	 	сєи
I	 	симь	 	симь	 	сєю
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	сия	 	сии	 	сии
A	 	сия	 	сии	 	сии
G	 	сєю	 	сєю	 	сєю
L	 	сєю	 	сєю	 	сєю
D	 	сима	 	сима	 	сима
I	 	сима	 	сима	 	сима
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	си, сии	 	си, ся	 	сиѣ
A	 	сиѣ	 	си, ся	 	сиѣ
G	 	сихъ	 	сихъ	 	сихъ
L	 	сихъ	 	сихъ	 	сихъ
D	 	симъ	 	симъ	 	симъ
I	 	сими	 	сими	 	сими
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
We see in the above paradigm the introduction of a secondary form сьи. Phonetically this represents [sĭjĭ], and as usual the sequence -jĭ- is represented as -и-. Since the first jer, inasmuch as it precedes a yod, is tense, it may also be written as -и-, and so we frequently find the form сии. Alternately, since the first jer is strong, yet soft, we may find it vocalized as -є-: сєи. The same rules apply throughout the remainder of the paradigm, leading to a large list of possible variant forms.

In addition the personal possessive adjectives follow the above paradigm of the soft declension. The adjective мои 'my' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	мои	 	моє	 	моя
A	 	мои	 	моє	 	мою
G	 	моєго	 	моєго	 	моєѣ, моєя
L	 	моємь	 	моємь	 	моєи
D	 	моєму	 	моєму	 	моєи
I	 	моимь	 	моимь	 	моєю
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	моя	 	мои	 	мои
A	 	моя	 	мои	 	мои
G	 	моєю	 	моєю	 	моєю
L	 	моєю	 	моєю	 	моєю
D	 	моима	 	моима	 	моима
I	 	моима	 	моима	 	моима
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	мои	 	моя	 	моѣ
A	 	моѣ	 	моя	 	моѣ
G	 	моихъ	 	моихъ	 	моихъ
L	 	моихъ	 	моихъ	 	моихъ
D	 	моимъ	 	моимъ	 	моимъ
I	 	моими	 	моими	 	моими
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
We also find in the declension of possessive adjectives the introduction of plural endings proper to the hard pronominal declension, such as genitive and locative plural моѣхъ, as well as dative plural моѣмъ.

The remaining personal possessive adjectives follow the same declension: твои 'thy, your'; свои 'one's own'; нашь 'our'; вашь 'your'; and even the relative-interrogative possessive adjective чьи 'whose'.

13.3 Mixed Pronominal Declension
The extremely common adjective вьсь 'all, every, whole' displays a declensional paradigm which contains a mixture of elements from both the hard and soft pronominal declensions. The paradigm is as follows.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	вьсь	 	вьсє	 	вься
A	 	вьсь	 	вьсє	 	вьсю
G	 	вьсєго	 	вьсєго	 	вьсєѣ, вьсєя
L	 	вьсємь	 	вьсємь	 	вьсєи
D	 	вьсєму	 	вьсєму	 	вьсєи
I	 	вьсѣмь	 	вьсѣмь	 	вьсєю
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	вься	 	вьси	 	вьси
A	 	вься	 	вьси	 	вьси
G	 	вьсєю	 	вьсєю	 	вьсєю
L	 	вьсєю	 	вьсєю	 	вьсєю
D	 	вьсѣма	 	вьсѣма	 	вьсѣма
I	 	вьсѣма	 	вьсѣма	 	вьсѣма
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	вьси	 	вься	 	вьсѣ
A	 	вьсѣ	 	вься	 	вьсѣ
G	 	вьсѣхъ	 	вьсѣхъ	 	вьсѣхъ
L	 	вьсѣхъ	 	вьсѣхъ	 	вьсѣхъ
D	 	вьсѣмъ	 	вьсѣмъ	 	вьсѣмъ
I	 	вьсѣми	 	вьсѣми	 	вьсѣми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
14 The Aorist System
The term aorist denotes a past tense formation which, in contrast to the imperfect, serves to represent a completed past action, with no reference to the so-called internal structure of the action. By internal structure we mean such characteristics as the temporal duration of an action (i.e. whether or not it requires an extended period of time to occur) or its continuity (i.e. whether it is a single, continuous action that unfolds over an unbroken time interval; or whether it amounts to a sequence of repeated actions, each individual one being more or less instantaneous, and only the sequence as a whole requiring an extended time interval to occur). By saying that the aorist denotes a completed past action with no reference to internal structure, we are stipulating

that, by virtue of being completed, both the beginning and end of the action have occurred, so that there is no possibility that the action may be viewed as potentially continuing up until the time of utterance; and
that, by virtue of excluding reference to internal structure, the beginning and end of the action, and hence the middle as well, cannot be distinguished from one another.
These two stipulations combine to render the aorist an essentially point-like past tense, whereas the imperfect by contrast suggests an open-ended interval beginning in the past. In concrete terms, while the imperfect might have the connotation in English of a form like I was jogging, the aorist would be rendered by I jogged. In the former, the grammatical form itself highlights that the action took place over an interval of time; in the latter, there is no such reference: only the lexical content of the verb jog provides the connotation of an expanse of time, inasmuch as one generally finds it difficult to jog instantaneously.

Proto-Slavic inherited two types of aorist construction from Proto-Indo-European. In the first, the endings follow directly upon the verbal root, or upon the thematic vowel appended to the verbal root. Naturally this formation has received the name root aorist. In the second, the suffix *-s- intervenes between the root and thematic vowel. As this formation pervades Greek past tense formation, and as the *-s- appears as sigma in Greek, this formation has been termed the sigmatic aorist.

Within Proto-Slavic, however, we find the advent of a new aorist formation, aptly titled the new aorist, or the ox-aorist after its characteristic suffix. Though Old Church Slavonic retains both the root and sigmatic aorists alongside the new aorist, Old Russian has largely eliminated the earlier formations in favor of the later. We will nevertheless discuss briefly the two more archaic aorists, since those verbs which retain those forms still occur frequently in the Old Russian texts.

Construction of the aorist, regardless of the particular formation, begins with identification of the infinitive-aorist stem. We have already outlined in the discussion of the imperfect in Section 4.2 how one arrives at this stem. Briefly, one takes the infinitive, undoes any sound changes that resulted from the addition of the infinitive marker -ти, and then removes the -ти altogether. The remaining verbal stem serves as the stem for the construction of the aorist.

14.1 Asigmatic Aorist
The root aorist is often termed the asigmatic aorist, to distinguish it from its sigmatic cousin, or merely the simple aorist to highlight the fact that it has no distinguishing suffix. This formation has all but completely disappeared from Old Russian by the time the extant texts were written down, except in two situations:

isolated remnants of the aorist of a pair of common verbs, and
in the second and third person singular aorist of most verbs, where the root aorist forms seem to have replaced the etymologically expected forms in both the sigmatic and ox-aorist paradigms.
Of the true root aorists that survive into Old Russian, the most prevalent is that built to ити 'to go', with stem ид-. The root aorist paradigm of this verb is listed below.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	(идъ)	 	(идовѣ)	 	(идомъ)
2	 	идє	 	(идєта)	 	(идєтє)
3	 	идє	 	(идєта)	 	(иду)
In the chart above, those forms listed in parentheses do not occur in the Old Russian texts.

The second verb to exhibit a root aorist formation is рєчи 'to speak', with stem рєк-. Again, the root aorist forms occur only in the second and third person singular, and they are identical: рєчє, derived from CS *rekes in the second person, from *reket in the third.

14.2 Sigmatic Aorist
The sigmatic aorist derives its name from the addition of *-s- to the root preceding the thematic vowel. Though several verbs show conjugations following this pattern in Old Church Slavonic, only one such verb remains in Old Russian: рєчи 'to speak', with stem рєк-. The sigmatic aorist paradigm of this verb is as follows.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	рѣхъ	 	рѣховѣ	 	рѣхомъ
2	 	рєчє	 	рѣста	 	рѣстє
3	 	рєчє	 	рѣста	 	рѣша
Again we see the intrusion of the root aorist in the second and third person singular with the common form рєчє. But in the remaining forms we see the presence of the s-suffix. The first person singular рѣхъ follows via the ruki rule (cf. Section 6.5) from *re:k-s-om > *rěksŭ > рѣхъ, though the front environment prevents this retraction in the third person plural: *re:k-s-nt > *rěksę > рѣша. Note the lengthening of the root vowel that typically accompanies the addition of the sigmatic suffix. This lengthening occurred in the Proto-Indo-European period, so that its result in Old Russian is not a change in vowel quantity, but rather in vowel quality. In this instance we see the natural reflex PIE *e: > CS *ě of the long vowel, rather than of the expected short root vowel PIE *e > CS *e.

14.3 New Aorist
By far the most common aorist formation in Old Russian is the new aorist or ox-aorist. As with other aorist formations, construction of the new aorist begins with the infinitive-aorist stem. To this Old Russian adds a suffix which appears mostly as -ox-, but as -os- before endings beginning with a consonant, and as -ош- in the third person plural. The ox-suffix does not appear at all in the second and third person singular. To this suffix Old Russian then adds the endings encountered above in other aorist formations. Where the infinitive-aorist stem ends in a vowel, the -o- of the the ox-suffix does not appear. The verbs рєчи 'to speak', with infinitive-aorist stem рєк-, and знати 'to know', with infinitive-aorist stem зна-, serve to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	рєкохъ	 	рєкоховѣ	 	рєкохомъ	 	 	 	 	 	знахъ	 	знаховѣ	 	знахомъ
2	 	рєчє	 	рєкоста	 	рєкостє	 	 	 	 	 	зна	 	знаста	 	знастє
3	 	рєчє	 	рєкоста	 	рєкоша	 	 	 	 	 	зна	 	знаста	 	знаша
In the second and third person singular we once again note the retention of root aorist forms. We see that the ending -є of these forms does not appear when the stem ends in a vowel. We also see clearly that the infinitive-aorist stem, here рєк- for the verb рєчи, contains stem-final sounds in the form that precedes any sound changes that might occur upon adding the infinitive suffix -ти. Thus, for example, грє-ти 'to row', from *greb-ti, builds the aorist on the stem грєб-. The verb ити 'to go' also builds a new aorist, with stem ид-. The forms of these verbs are as follows.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	грєбохъ	 	грєбоховѣ	 	грєбохомъ	 	 	 	 	 	идохъ	 	идоховѣ	 	идохомъ
2	 	грєбє	 	грєбоста	 	грєбостє	 	 	 	 	 	идє	 	идоста	 	идостє
3	 	грєбє	 	грєбоста	 	грєбоша	 	 	 	 	 	идє	 	идоста	 	идоша
Certain anomalies, however, present themselves. For example, рєчи 'to speak' also shows signs of a stem рьк- alongside the more common рєк-: ркоша 'they said'. Similarly the verbs тєчи 'to run' and жєчи 'to burn' show stems тьк- and жьг-, respectively.

Moreover verbs whose stem derives from an etymological nasal, or -r-, among a handful of others, often show an ending -тъ in the second and third person singular. Athematic verbs, such as дати 'to give' and вѣдѣти 'to know', also show an alternate suffix -стъ in these forms, which in certain instances may derive originally from a stem-final -д followed by the -тъ suffix just mentioned. Consider the following examples.

Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	Stem	 	2nd/3rd Sg.	 	OCS
въз-я-ти	 	take	 	възя-	 	възятъ	 	възѧти
на-чя-ти	 	begin	 	начя-	 	начятъ	 	нацѧти
у-мєрє-ти	 	die	 	умрѣ-	 	умрѣтъ	 	ѹмрѣти
да-ти	 	give	 	да(д)-	 	дастъ	 	дати
вѣд-ѣ-ти	 	know	 	вѣд-	 	вѣстъ	 	вѣдѣти
Verbs with the -ну- suffix show two different aorist formations. In one formation, the ox-aorist is built from the stem including the ну-suffix. In the other formation, the ну-suffix itself is dropped and the ox-aorist is built directly to the remaining stem. The verb двиг-ну-ти 'to move' illustrates the forms.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	двигъ	 	двигоховѣ	 	двигохомъ	 	 	 	 	 	двигнухъ	 	двигнуховѣ	 	двигнухомъ
2	 	движє	 	двигоста	 	двигостє	 	 	 	 	 	двигну	 	двигнуста	 	двигнустє
3	 	движє	 	двигоста	 	двигоша	 	 	 	 	 	двигну	 	двигнуста	 	двигнуша
We find in the above paradigm another illustration of the fact that the -o- of the ox-suffix does not appear when the aorist stem ends in a vowel.

15 Genitive Objects & Negation
Old Russian shares with Old Church Slavonic some special uses of the genitive case that are somewhat unexpected when viewed in comparison to other ancient sister languages within the Indo-European family. These uses occur with sufficient frequency that they merit attention early in the study of Old Russian.

15.1 Genitive Objects
Old Russian shows the emergence of a special treatment of direct objects. Old Russian generally places the direct object of a transitive verb in the accusative, as do others of the ancient Indo-European languages. But when the direct object happens to be human and male -- i.e. a man -- Old Russian regularly puts the direct object in the genitive case. For example: убиша Игоря и дружину єго "They killed Igor and his retinue" (Primary Chronicle). Here we see that the aorist убиша 'they killed' takes the direct object дружину 'retinue' (from the feminine noun дружина) in the accusative as expected. But rather than employing the normal accusative Игорь of the proper noun Игорь 'Igor', we see that Old Russian places the male human direct object in the genitive case. The following example shows that Old Russian makes a clear distinction between women and men: поимѣмъ жєну єго Ольгу за кънязь свои Малъ, и Святослава... "Let us take his wife, Olga, for our prince, Mal, and Svjatoslav..." (Primary Chronicle). Here жєну (from жєна 'wife') and Ольгу (from Ольга 'Olga') show the distinct accusative singular appropriate to feminine nouns. But Святослава (from Святославъ 'Svjatoslav'), also the direct object of поимѣмъ 'let us take', clearly shows the genitive singular ending.

It seems that this tendency to distinguish direct objects that are men does not always extend to groups. In the previous example we saw that дружина 'retinue' retains the accusative, even though it clearly represents a group of men. But in such a situation we might argue that the noun represents a collection, and so not men per se. Consider however the following example: то присълитє мужа нарочитꙑ, да въ вєлицѣ чисти поиду за вашь кънязь "... then send me your best men, that I marry your prince in great honor" (Primary Chronicle). Here we clearly have direct reference to men, but the word мужа (from мужь 'man'), together with the adjective нарочитꙑ (from the adjective нарочитъ 'distinguished'), distinctly show the endings of the accusative plural.

15.2 Genitive with Negation
Another striking feature of Old Russian is the interaction of the genitive case with negation. In particular, the direct object of a transitive verb takes the genitive in the presence of negation. For example: и нє послуха ихъ Игорь "and Igor didn't listen to them", or slightly more literally "and Igor didn't hear them", emphasizing the fact that послуха expects a direct object (Primary Chronicle). Rather than the proper accusative plural ѣ or я (cf. OCS ѩ), we find the direct object in the genitive plural ихъ. Similarly нє вѣси закона "You don't know the law" (Primary Chronicle), where the proper accusative would be законъ 'law'.

Even more noteworthy is the extension of this trend to the actual subject of a sentence. Specifically, in the presence of negation the subject of the verb may take the genitive rather than the nominative. This typically occurs in statements concerning the existence of some quantity, or the lack thereof, where the verb is a copula like 'be'. For example: нынѣ у васъ нѣсть мєду ни скоры "Now there is neither honey nor wine in your possession" (Primary Chronicle). Here меду is the genitive singular, rather than the expected nominative of the u-stem noun медъ 'honey'. Likewise скоры is the genitive singular of the feminine noun скора 'fur'.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 4
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
III.iii Documentary Evidence for the Term 'Rus'
The internal evidence for the use of the term Rus is mixed at best: in the Primary Chronicle the term early refers clearly to foreign-born princes, only later to be applied to their descendants together with the people over which they ruled. The Novgorod Chronicle, another literary source for our knowledge of the early East Slavs, by contrast applies the term Rus consistently to the people in and around Kiev, relatively far to its south and removed from the original Baltic homeland of the imported Scandinavians. Because of this lack of clarity, scholars have also sought out the use of terms similar to Rus in works whose authors came from some of the surrounding cultures with which the Eastern Slavs had interaction.

III.iii.i The Annals of St. Bertin
Numerous historical documents actually employ terms which can plausibly be identified with the term Rus (Rusĭ) found in the Primary Chronicle. The earliest among these is the Annals of St. Bertin (Latin Annales Bertiniani), like the Primary Chronicle a written account of historical events organized by their year of occurrence. We find under the year 839 AD mention of an embassy sent by the Byzantine emperor Theophilus to the court of the emperor Louis the Pious in Ingelheim. The account (Waitz, 1883, p.19) states that

 	 	Latin	 	English
 	 	Misit etiam cum eis quosdam, qui se, id est gentem suam, Rhos vocari dicebant, quos rex illorum chacanus vocabulo ad se amicitiae, sicut asserebant, causa direxerat, petens per memoratam epistolam, quatenus benignitate imperatoris redeundi facultatem atque auxilium per imperium suum toto habere possent, quoniam itinera, per quae ad illum Constantinopolim venerant, inter barbaras et nimiae feritatis gentes inmanissimas habuerant, quibus eos, ne forte periculum inciderent, redire noluit. Quorum adventus causam imperator diligentius investigans, comperit, eos gentis esse Sueonum.	 	[Theophilus] sent with them certain men who called themselves, that is (called) their people, the Rhos; and whom, by their account, their king, or kagan in their terminology, sent to [Theophilus] in friendship. [Theophilus] requested in the previously mentioned letter that on account of the emperor's graciousness they be granted permission to return and an escort through his empire, since the roads by which they had arrived at Constantinople had fallen to the barbarians and exceedingly wild tribes, and by which (roads) he did not wish for them to return, lest they chance upon danger. The emperor, upon diligently investigating the reasons for their arrival, established that they were from the people of the Sueoni.
The passage demonstrates a link between the Rhos, or Rus, and the Sueoni, who were in fact Swedes. This falls in line with the account in the Primary Chronicle. In this period much of Western Europe still felt the sting of Viking Age and the pervasive fear of Viking attacks, many of which began with trickery and cunning as disguised Scandinavians arrived at unsuspecting villages (Coupland, 2003). Thus Louis the Pious would have been well advised to investigate the origin of these particular Scandinavians before offering any assistance. In addition it is worth noting that St. Bertin's account of the Rhos, dating to 839, precedes the Primary Chronicle's Invitation to the Varangians, which is recorded under the year 862.

III.iii.ii Liutprand of Cremona
Another early source comes from Liutprand of Cremona, writing in the 10th century. He writes of Russi who attacked Byzantium in 941 AD. Liutprand (Reuber, 1584, p.92) states that

 	 	Latin	 	English
 	 	Constantinopolitana urbs, quae prius Byzantium, nova nunc dicitur Roma, inter ferocissimas gentes est constituta.	 	The city Constantinople, formerly Byzantium, now called New Rome, is situated among the fiercest of peoples.
 	 	Habet quippe ab Aquilone Hungaros, Pizenacos, Chazaros, Russios, quos alio nomine nos Nortmannos apellamus, atque Bulgaros nimium sibi vicinos	 	It has to the north the Hungarians, the Pizenaci, the Khazars, the Russii, whom by a different name we call Normans, and the Bulgars as close neighbors.
Later Liutprand expands on the relation between Russii and "Normans" (ibid., p. 144):

 	 	Latin	 	English
 	 	Gens quaedam est sub Aquilonis parte constituta, quam a qualitate corporis Graeci vocant Russos, nos vero a positione loci vocamus Nordmannos.	 	There is a certain people situated in a region of the North, which the Greeks call the Russii on account of their physical quality, but which we call Normans on account of their geographical location.
 	 	Lingua quippe Teutonum Nord aquilo, man autem mas seu vir dicitur: unde & Nordmannos Aquilonares homines dicere possumus.	 	In the German language Nord (means) 'north', and man means 'male' or 'man': whence we are also able to call the Normans the 'Northern men'.
 	 	Huius denique gentis rex Inger vocabulo erat, qui collectis mille & eo amplio navibus Constantinopolim venit.	 	And the king of this group went by the name Inger, who gathered a thousand and more ships and came to Constantinople.
The comment on the Greek reason for the name Russii relates to a play on words. Latin russus and russeus mean 'reddish', as does Greek rousios.

These passages from Liutprand's work make clear that he himself understood the term "Russii" as a particular name for Normans. But moreover, he shows that in this context the term Norman (literally Normanni) still carries its literal sense: north-men. This generally falls in line with the accounts of the Rus as Scandinavians, or Norsemen. But as Liutprand's account focuses on the situation in Byzantium, it is not altogether certain whether 'north' should be taken in the general sense of 'in the north of Europe', i.e. Scandinavia, or in the more specific sense of 'to the north of Byzantium'. This latter, in principle, would allow even the inhabitants of Kiev to be called "north-men" from the perspective of the Byzantines. However it is more likely that by this time Normanni in Latin had taken on the connotation of Normans or Norsemen specifically, given that their fame as raiders had already long been spreading throughout Europe.

III.iii.iii Ibn Fadlan
A handful of accounts also survive from the Arabic- and Persian-speaking worlds which mention a people likely to be associated with the Rus. One such account was written by Ibn Fadlan, a diplomat sent by the caliph of Baghdad on a mission to the Volga Bulgars. In recounting his travels he mentions the customs of a people, whom he calls Ru:siyyah, that he chanced upon in Atil (the Khazar city of Itil, located at the mouth of the Volga as it spills into the Caspian Sea). The following is an excerpt from his Risa:la, or 'writing' (Montgomery, 2000):

 	 	I saw the Ru:siyyah when they had arrived on their trading expedition and had disembarked at the River Atil. I have never seen more perfect physiques than theirs -- they are like palm trees, are fair and reddish, and do not wear the qurtaq or the caftan. The man wears a cloak with which he covers one half of his body, leaving one of his arms uncovered. Every one of them carries an axe, a sword and a dagger and is never without all of that which we have mentioned. Their swords are of the Frankish variety, with broad, ridged blades. Each man, from the tip of his toes to his neck, is covered in dark-green lines, pictures and suck like. Each woman has, on her breast, a small disc, tied <around her neck>, made of either iron, silver, copper or gold, in relation to her husband's financial and social worth. Each disc has a ring to which a dagger is attached, also lying on her breast.
The above passage, admittedly, does not provide sufficient information to decide whether the Ru:siyyah are to be understood as Scandinavians or as Slavs, or as some other unspecified people. It is not until later in the account that Ibn Fadlan describes the burial practices of this people, and here we find clear Scandinavian overtones (Montgomery, 2000):

 	 	I was told that when their chieftains die, the least they do is to cremate them. I was very keen to verify this, when I learned of the death of one of their great men. They placed him in his grave (qabr) and erected a canopy over it for ten days, until they had finished making and sewing his <funeral garments>.
 	 	In the case of a poor man they build a small boat, place him inside and burn it. In the case of a rich man, they gather together his possessions and divide them into three, one third for his family, one third to use for <his funeral> garments, and one third with which they purchase alcohol which they drink on the day when his slave-girl kills herself and is cremated together with her master. (They are addicted to alcohol, which they drink night and day. Sometimes one of them dies with the cup still in his hand.)
This provides evidence of burial practices common among the Scandinavians of the era. Moreover the account goes on to describe in detail the ship burial of a particularly important group member.

III.iii.iv Commentary
The documentary evidence leaves tantalizing traces of the interaction between the Rus and cultures spread across their trade routes. However we would do well to keep in mind Mongomery's (2000) warning:

 	 	I am not convinced that by Ru:s/Ru:siyyah our text means either the Vikings or the Russians specifically. I am neither a Normanist nor an anti-Normanist. The Arabic sources in general quite simply do no afford us enough clarity. The tendency among scholars is to presume that different Arab authors mean the same thing when they apply the names Ru:s or Maju:s to the people they describe. After a perusal of the sources, this strikes me as a perilous presumption.
This displays well deserved caution, one which applies beyond the sources written from the perspective of the Arabic- and Persian-speaking worlds. It is not clear that all of the passages listed above truly are talking about the same people. On the one hand, it is not clear whether they distinguish Eastern Slavs from the Scandinavians that passed through their midst. On the other hand, it is not clear that the Eastern Slavs were sufficiently uniform amongst themselves to be distinguishable by cultural "outsiders" from Scandinavians often living in close quarters with them.

One point that does remain clear, however, is that the earliest East Slavic texts speak of an original distinction between the two peoples. A particular group of Scandinavians did evidently come to the East Slavic homeland and play an important role in the establishment of the early ruling class of the first dominant East Slavic cultural centers. But over the course of the succeeding century they seem to have blended with the indigenous Slavs to sufficient degree for the two cultures to form one distinct culture of Rus, with Old Russian and its spoken variants as the principal means of communication in the region.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The following passage relates the arrival of the Derevlians in Olga's court. After an exchange of greetings, Olga sets the stage and exacts her revenge. The extract lists lines 38-70.

38-40 - и повѣдаша ѡльзѣ ꙗко деревлѧне придоша. и возва є ѡльга к собѣ и рече имъ добри гостьє придоша.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повѣдаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <повѣдѣти, -вѣмь, -вѣси> announce, report, recount -- they announced
ѡльзѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- to Olga
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- that
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
придоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- had arrived # Note the use of the Old Russian aorist where English permits a pluperfect
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
возва -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <възвати, -зовѫ, -зовєши> call, summon -- summoned
є -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them # Note є where we expect я, OCS ѩ
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- before
собѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- her
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
добри -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <добръ> good -- The welcome
гостьє -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <гость> guest -- guests
придоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- have arrived # Note the use of the Old Russian aorist where English permits a perfect. Compare with the previous usage of this same form.

40-41 - и рѣша деревлѧне придохомъ кнѧгине.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- replied
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
придохомъ -- verb; 1st person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- We have arrived
кнѧгине -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <кънѧгꙑни> princess -- princess

41-42 - и рече имъ ѡльга, да глаголите что ради придосте сѣмо.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- ...
глаголите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- Tell
что -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- what
ради -- postposition; <ради> (w. gen.) for, for the sake of, because of -- for # Governs что, though the genitive чесо is expected
придосте -- verb; 2nd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- have you come # Again an Old Russian aorist where English might employ a perfect
сѣмо -- adverb; <сѣмо> to here, here -- here

42-45 - рѣша же древлѧне посла нꙑ дерьвьска зємлѧ рькуще сице, мужа твоєго ѹбихомъ, бѧше бо мужь твои аки волкъ восхищаꙗ и грабѧ.
 Collapse All
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- responded
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
древлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
посла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
нꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <азъ> I -- us
дерьвьска -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- of Dereva
зємлѧ -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the nation
рькуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- speaking # Note the shift to masculine plural, rather than feminine singular: either agreeing with the plurality of people represented by the term зємлѧ or another example of the genesis of the gerund.
сице -- adverb; <сицє> thus, so -- thus
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
твоєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <твои, твоє, твоꙗ> thy, thine, your, of you (sg.) -- your
ѹбихомъ -- verb; 1st person plural aorist of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- We have killed
бѧше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
мужь -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
твои -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <твои, твоє, твоꙗ> thy, thine, your, of you (sg.) -- your
аки -- adverb; <акꙑ> as, like -- like # Note the appearance of -и- in place of -ъӏ-, which on historical grounds would be unexpected after a velar consonant
волкъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <влъкъ> wolf -- a wolf
восхищаꙗ -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <въсхꙑтати, -таѭ, -таѥши> seize, snatch -- robbing
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
грабѧ -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <грабити, -блѭ, -биши> seize, snatch -- plundering

45-48 - а наши кнѧзи добри суть, иже распасли суть деревьску зємлю. да поиди за кнѧзь нашь за малъ. бѣ бо имѧ єму малъ кнѧзю дерьвьску.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- But
наши -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <нашь> our, of us -- our
кнѧзи -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <кънѧзь> prince -- princes
добри -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <добръ> good -- good
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- are
иже -- relative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <ижє> who, which -- who
распасли -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <распасти, -сѫ, -сєши> pasture, feed -- cultivated
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- ... # Note the agreement with the logical number of the subject, three (hence plural), rather than the grammatical number (singular), which is determined by братья
деревьску -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- of Dereva
зємлю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the land
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- ...
поиди -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- Come (and marry) # A common idiomatic turn of phrase encountered in this text: жена (по)идеть за мужь 'a woman marries a man', more literally 'a woman goes after a man'.
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- ...
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
нашь -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- our
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- ...
малъ -- proper noun; masculine accusative singular of <Малъ> Mal (name of a prince) -- Mal
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- For
имѧ -- noun; neuter nominative singular of <имѧ> name -- (his) name
єму -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- his
малъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Малъ> Mal (name of a prince) -- Mal
кнѧзю -- noun; masculine dative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince # Dative agreeing with єму
дерьвьску -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- Derevlian

48-51 - рече же имъ ѡльга, люба ми єсть рѣчь ваша. ѹже мнѣ мужа своєго не крѣсити, но хочю вꙑ почтити наутриꙗ предъ людьми своими.
 Collapse All
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
люба -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <любъ> dear; pleasing; choice, chosen -- pleasing
ми -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me
єсть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is
рѣчь -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <рѣчь> speech -- proposal
ваша -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- Now (there is)
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- for me
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
своєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- my
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- no (way)
крѣсити -- verb; infinitive of <крѣсити, -шѫ, -сиши> rouse, wake, raise -- to raise
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
хочю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- I want
вꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
почтити -- verb; infinitive of <почьстити, -штѫ, -стиши> cultivate, care for, honor -- to honor
наутриꙗ -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <наѹтрьѥ> morning, morrow, tomorrow -- tomorrow # Note use of genitive to specify time
предъ -- preposition; <прѣдъ> (w. acc. or instr.) before, in front of -- before
людьми -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- people
своими -- adjective; masculine instrumental plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- my

52-53 - а нꙑне идѣте в лодью свою и лѧзите в лодьꙇ величающе сѧ. азъ ѹтро послю по вꙑ.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
нꙑне -- adverb; <нꙑн҄ꙗ, нꙑнѣ> now -- For now
идѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- go
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
лодью -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <лодья> boat -- boat
свою -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- your
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
лѧзите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <лєшти, лѧгѫ, лѧжєши> lie down, recline -- take your repose
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
лодьꙇ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat
величающе -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <вєличати, -чаѭ, -чаѥши> raise; (refl.) be raised, be exalted, be elated, be conceited -- exulting
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
ѹтро -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <ютро, ѹтро> dawn, daybreak; morning, morrow, tomorrow -- in the morning # Note accusative to specify (extent of) time
послю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- I will send
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
вꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you

53-56 - вꙑ же рьцѣте не єдемъ на конѣхъ, ни пѣши идемъ, но понесѣте нꙑ в лодьѣ. и възнесуть вꙑ в лодьи. и ѿпусти ꙗ в лодью.
 Collapse All
вꙑ -- pronoun; nominative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- ...
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
рьцѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- say
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
єдемъ -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <ꙗхати (ꙗд-), -хаѭ, -хаѥши> be carried, ride, go -- We will... be carried
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
конѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <конь> horse -- horses
ни -- conjunction; <ни> and not, nor, no; (repeated) neither... nor -- nor
пѣши -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <пѣшь> on foot, foot-borne, standing -- on foot
идемъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- will we go
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
понесѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <понєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> carry, transport -- carry
нꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <азъ> I -- us
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- on
лодьѣ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- a boat
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
възнесуть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <възнєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> carry, transport, transfer -- they will carry
вꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- on
лодьи -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
ѿпусти -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <отъпѹстити, -штѫ, -стиши> allow, let, free; send (away) -- she released
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
лодью -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat

56-58 - ѡльга же повелѣ ископати ꙗму велику и глубоку на дворѣ теремьстѣмь внѣ града.
 Collapse All
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- ordered
ископати -- verb; infinitive of <ископати, -паѭ, -паѥши> dig, dig out, excavate -- to be dug
ꙗму -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <ꙗма> pit, hole -- a hole
велику -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- wide
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
глубоку -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <глѫбокъ> deep -- deep
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- in
дворѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the... court
теремьстѣмь -- adjective; masculine locative singular of <трѣмьнъ> of a tower, relating to a tower, relating to a castle -- tower
внѣ -- preposition; <внѣ> (w. gen.) outside (of) -- outside
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city

58-60 - и заѹтра волга сѣдѧщи в теремѣ посла по гости. и придоша к нимъ глаголюще, зоветь вꙑ ѡльга на честь вєлику.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
заѹтра -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of + noun; neuter genitive singular of <ютро, ѹтро> dawn, daybreak; morning, morrow, tomorrow -- the next morning
волга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
сѣдѧщи -- participle; feminine nominative singular of <сѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> sit, remain -- sitting
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
теремѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <трѣмъ> tower, castle; home, residence -- the tower
посла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
гости -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <гость> guest -- the guests
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
придоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- they came
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
нимъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- them
глаголюще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- saying
зоветь -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <звати, зовѫ, зовєши> cry out; call, summon -- summons
вꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- for
честь -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <чьсть> honor, rank, reverence, feast, device, pattern -- a... honor
вєлику -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- great

60-62 - ѡни же рѣша не єдемъ на конихъ, ни на возѣхъ. понесѣте нꙑ в лодьи.
 Collapse All
ѡни -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- responded
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
єдемъ -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <ꙗхати (ꙗд-), -хаѭ, -хаѥши> be carried, ride, go -- We will... be carried
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
конихъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <конь> horse -- horses # Note the change of declension between конихъ here and конѣхъ earlier, lines 53-56
ни -- conjunction; <ни> and not, nor, no; (repeated) neither... nor -- nor
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
возѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <возъ> chariot, wagon, cart -- carts
понесѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <понєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> carry, transport -- Carry
нꙑ -- pronoun; accusative plural of <азъ> I -- us
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
лодьи -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat

62-64 - рѣша же киꙗне, намъ неволѧ; кнѧзь нашь ѹбьєнъ. а кнѧгини наша хоче за вашь кнѧзь. и понесоша ꙗ в лодьи.
 Collapse All
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
киꙗне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <кꙑꙗнинъ> of Kiev, of Kyiv, Kievan -- The Kievans
намъ -- pronoun; dative plural of <азъ> I -- We (have) # Literally 'to us there is (need)'
неволѧ -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <нєволꙗ> need, necessity -- need
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
нашь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- our
ѹбьєнъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- (is) killed
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- But
кнѧгини -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <кънѧгꙑни> princess -- princess
наша -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- our
хоче -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- longs
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- after
вашь -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
понесоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <понєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> carry, transport -- they carried
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
лодьи -- noun; feminine locative singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat

64-67 - ѡни же сѣдѧху в перегъбѣхъ в вєликихъ сустугахъ гордѧще сѧ, и принесоша ꙗ на дворъ к ользѣ.
 Collapse All
ѡни -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
сѣдѧху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <сѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> sit, remain -- sat
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- on
перегъбѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <прѣгъбъ> (meaning unclear) a bending; a bending backward, vain glory, pomposity; a piece of cloth, decorative cloak with bejeweled clasp; cross-bench (of a Viking ship) -- on the cross-benches
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
вєликихъ -- adjective; feminine locative plural of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- great
сустугахъ -- noun; feminine locative plural of <сътѫга> (meaning unclear) a binding; clasp, buckle; fibula -- robes
гордѧще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <гръдити сѧ, -ждѫ, -диши> be haughty, be arrogant -- exalted with pride
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
принесоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <принєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> bring, carry -- they brought
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- into
дворъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the court
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
ользѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga

67 - несъше вринуша є въ ꙗму и с лодьєю.
 Collapse All
несъше -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <нєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> bring -- Having carried (them)
вринуша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <въринѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> thrust in; throw, throw in; cast away -- they cast
є -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them # Note є where we expect я, OCS ѩ
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- into
ꙗму -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <ꙗма> pit, hole -- the pit
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- too
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
лодьєю -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <лодья> boat -- the boat

68-69 - приникъши ѡльга и рече имъ, добра ли вꙑ чєсть.
 Collapse All
приникъши -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <приникнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> stoop to look, peer, look -- peered
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
добра -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <добръ> good -- good (enough)
ли -- adverb; <ли> or; whether -- (Is)
вꙑ -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- for you
чєсть -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <чьсть> honor, rank, reverence, feast, device, pattern -- (that) honor

69-70 - ѡни же рѣша, пущи нꙑ игоревꙑ смерти. и повелѣ засꙑпати ꙗ живꙑ. и посꙑпаша ꙗ.
 Collapse All
ѡни -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- replied
пущи -- comparative adjective; neuter nominative singular of <пѹштий> more pitiable, more wretched -- worse
нꙑ -- pronoun; dative plural of <азъ> I -- to us (it's)
игоревꙑ -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <игорєвъ> of Igor, Igor's, relating to Igor -- Igor's
смерти -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <съмрьть> death -- than... death # Note the use of the genitive with comparison
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- she commanded
засꙑпати -- verb; infinitive of <засꙑпати, -плѭ, -плѥши> cover, cover over, hide, bury -- (that they) bury
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
живꙑ -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <живъ> alive, living -- alive
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
посꙑпаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <посꙑпати, -плѭ, -плѥши> cover, cover over, hide, bury -- they covered
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them

Lesson Text
38-40 - и повѣдаша ѡльзѣ ꙗко деревлѧне придоша. и возва є ѡльга к собѣ и рече имъ добри гостьє придоша. 40-41 - и рѣша деревлѧне придохомъ кнѧгине. 41-42 - и рече имъ ѡльга, да глаголите что ради придосте сѣмо. 42-45 - рѣша же древлѧне посла нꙑ дерьвьска зємлѧ рькуще сице, мужа твоєго ѹбихомъ, бѧше бо мужь твои аки волкъ восхищаꙗ и грабѧ. 45-48 - а наши кнѧзи добри суть, иже распасли суть деревьску зємлю. да поиди за кнѧзь нашь за малъ. бѣ бо имѧ єму малъ кнѧзю дерьвьску. 48-51 - рече же имъ ѡльга, люба ми єсть рѣчь ваша. ѹже мнѣ мужа своєго не крѣсити, но хочю вꙑ почтити наутриꙗ предъ людьми своими. 52-53 - а нꙑне идѣте в лодью свою и лѧзите в лодьꙇ величающе сѧ. азъ ѹтро послю по вꙑ. 53-56 - вꙑ же рьцѣте не єдемъ на конѣхъ, ни пѣши идемъ, но понесѣте нꙑ в лодьѣ. и възнесуть вꙑ в лодьи. и ѿпусти ꙗ в лодью. 56-58 - ѡльга же повелѣ ископати ꙗму велику и глубоку на дворѣ теремьстѣмь внѣ града. 58-60 - и заѹтра волга сѣдѧщи в теремѣ посла по гости. и придоша к нимъ глаголюще, зоветь вꙑ ѡльга на честь вєлику. 60-62 - ѡни же рѣша не єдемъ на конихъ, ни на возѣхъ. понесѣте нꙑ в лодьи. 62-64 - рѣша же киꙗне, намъ неволѧ; кнѧзь нашь ѹбьєнъ. а кнѧгини наша хоче за вашь кнѧзь. и понесоша ꙗ в лодьи. 64-67 - ѡни же сѣдѧху в перегъбѣхъ в вєликихъ сустугахъ гордѧще сѧ, и принесоша ꙗ на дворъ к ользѣ. 67 - несъше вринуша є въ ꙗму и с лодьєю. 68-69 - приникъши ѡльга и рече имъ, добра ли вꙑ чєсть. 69-70 - ѡни же рѣша, пущи нꙑ игоревꙑ смерти. и повелѣ засꙑпати ꙗ живꙑ. и посꙑпаша ꙗ.
Translation
38-40 And they announced to Olga that the Derevlians had arrived. And Olga summoned them before her and said to them, "The welcome guests have arrived." 40-41 And the Derevlians replied, "We have arrived, princess." 41-42 And Olga bade them, "Tell: for what have you come here?" 42-45 And the Derevlians responded, "The nation of Dereva sent us, speaking thus: 'We have killed your husband, for your husband was like a wolf, robbing and plundering. 45-48 But our princes are good, who cultivated the land of Dereva. Come (and marry) our prince, Mal.'" For his name was Mal, the Derevlian prince. 48-51 And Olga said to them, "Your words are dear to me. Now (there is) no (way) for me to raise my husband. But I want to honor you tomorrow before my people. 52-53 For now go to your boat and take your repose in the boat, exulting. In the morning I will send for you. 53-56 But say this: 'We will not be carried on horses, nor will we go on foot, but carry us on a boat.' And they will carry you on the boat." And she released them to the boat. 56-58 But Olga ordered a hole to be dug wide and deep in the tower court outside of the city. 58-60 And the next morning, sitting in the tower, Olga sent for the guests. And they came to them, saying, "Olga summons you for a great honor." 60-62 And they responded, "We will not be carried on horses, nor on carts. Carry us in the boat." 62-64 The Kievans said, "We have need; our prince is killed. But our princess longs after your prince." And they carried them in the boat. 64-67 And they sat on the cross-benches (?) in great robes, exalted with pride. And they brought them into the court to Olga. 67 Having carried them, they cast them into the pit with the boat too. 68-69 Olga peered in and said to them, "Is that honor good (enough) for you?" 69-70 And they replied, "To us it's worse than Igor's death." And she commanded that (they) bury them alive. And they covered them.
Grammar
16 Consonant-Stem Nouns
Consonant-stem nouns form the "other" declension of Old Russian. Really the consonant-stem nouns descend from a wide variety of Indo-European formations. But within Common Slavic in general, and Old Russian in particular, these formations have coalesced into a fairly unified declensional type. Speaking generally, the Old Russian nouns of this declension show a nominative singular that can take one of a handful of shapes, each appearing more or less "strange" or "unique" from the viewpoint of the nominal declensions we have seen heretofore. This unique nominative singular is then stripped from the noun and replaced with a suffix that then persists throughout the remainder of the paradigm.

To this suffix Old Russian adds a specific set of endings which, though somewhat distinct from the declension types we have seen, remains consistent throughout all the individual consonant-stem declensions. Foremost among these endings is the genitive singular in -є, for which some scholars call these the e-declension. Such nomenclature is specific to Slavic studies and does not refer, in contrast to other declensions, to any thematic vowel dating to the Indo-European period. It does however recall the *-e- found in the PIE genitive singular ending *-es.

16.1 v-Stem Nouns
The v-declension in Indo-European terms should more properly be called the long-u-declension. This declension comprises a handful of exclusively feminine nouns whose inflectional type harkens back to that of nouns with a long-*u in Proto-Indo-European. In the nominative singular the final *-s of the regular inflection fell away in Common Slavic and the long-u evolved into Common Slavic *-y, hence Old Russian ы. In the remainder of the paradigm, however, where this long-*u preceded vowel-initial endings, the long-*u was reanalyzed as the sequence *-uu-, and hence *-uō(t) before the following vowel. This leaves a distinctive stem suffix -ъв- that permeates the paradigm of v-stem nouns. Examples of nouns belonging to this declension are свєкры 'mother-in-law', любы 'love', and смокы 'fig'. The forms of црькы 'church' illustrate the v-stem declension.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	црькы	 	црькъви	 	црькъвє
A	 	црькъвь	 	црькъви	 	црькъви
G	 	црькъвє	 	црькъву	 	црькъвъ
L	 	црькъвє	 	црькъву	 	црькъвахъ
D	 	црькъви	 	црькъвама	 	црькъвамъ
I	 	црькъвью	 	црькъвама	 	црькъвами
V	 	црькы	 	црькъви	 	црькъвє
In the locative, dative, and instrumental plural we see the influence of the a-declension with forms such as црькъвамъ. The same applies to the dative and instrumental dual forms. In particular we note that the v-declension forms an exception to the rule of thumb that the thematic vowel appears in the dative plural.

We also find the ending -ью in the instrumental singular, a form influenced both by the a-declension and by the feminines of the i-declension. Moreover the i-declension shows a strong influence on nouns of the v-declension, so that we also find forms such as genitive and locative singular црькъви alongside the expected црькъвє. In fact the influence of the i-stems is so pervasive in some nouns that the nominative singular itself has been reformed. An example of this is provided by кры 'blood', which properly belongs to the v-declension, but whose forms show a strong influence from the i-declension.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	кръвь	 	-	 	кръви
A	 	кръвь	 	-	 	кръви
G	 	кръвє, кръви	 	-	 	кръвьи, кръвъ, кръвы
L	 	кръви	 	-	 	кръвьхъ
D	 	кръви	 	-	 	кръвьмъ
I	 	кръвью	 	-	 	кръвьми
V	 	кръвь	 	-	 	кръви
Note that jers in tense position, such as in кръвьи and црькъвью, may be written with -и-: кръвии and црькъвию.

16.2 n-Stem Nouns
The n-stem declension contains the remnants of what was a very important class of nouns in the Indo-European parent language. In Proto-Indo-European many nouns of the core vocabulary showed *n-stem inflection; some seemed to alternate between *r-stem and *n-stem: English r-stem water corresponds to Hittite r-stem wadar with the same meaning; however the Hittite noun shows an n-stem in many oblique forms, such as genitive singular wedenas, which in turn corresponds to the n-stem preserved in Old Norse vatn 'water'.

As with the v-stem declension, the forms split between a unique form for the nominative singular and a relatively stable stem throughout the rest of the paradigm. For the n-stems, a nominative singular with -n- preceded by a long-*o in PIE resulted in Old Russian -ы; meanwhile a nominative singular with -n- preceded by long-*e in PIE resulted in a nasalized -ѧ in Old Church Slavonic, but -я in Old Russian with the typical loss of nasalization. In the remainder of the paradigm, the sequence *-en- typically preceded a vowel, and so persisted unchanged. This yields the stem suffix -єн- characteristic of the n-declension. Examples from this declension include the masculine noun камы 'stone', as well as the neuter nouns врѣмя (вєрємя) 'time' and чисмя 'number'.

The masculine noun камꙑ 'stone', whose nominative derives from an original form with long-*o, and the neuter noun имя 'name', whose nominative harkens back to the long-*e grade, serve to illustrate the n-stem declension.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	камы	 	камєни	 	камєнє	 	 	 	 	 	имя	 	имєнѣ	 	имєна
A	 	камєнь	 	камєни	 	камєни	 	 	 	 	 	имєнь	 	имєнѣ	 	имєна
G	 	камєнє	 	камєну	 	камєнъ	 	 	 	 	 	имєнє	 	имєну	 	имєнъ
L	 	камєнє	 	камєну	 	камєньхъ	 	 	 	 	 	имєнє	 	имєну	 	имєньхъ
D	 	камєни	 	камєньма	 	камєньмъ	 	 	 	 	 	имєни	 	имєньма	 	имєньмъ
I	 	камєньмь	 	камєньма	 	камєньми	 	 	 	 	 	имєньмь	 	имєньма	 	имєны
V	 	камы	 	камєни	 	камєни	 	 	 	 	 	имя	 	имєнѣ	 	имєна
Note in this declension the reappearance of the ending -ьмь in the instrumental singular, as well as -ь- in the locative, dative, and instrumental plural where the v-declension employed -а-. In the paradigm for the neuter noun имя, however, we see the instrumental plural appears as имєн-ы, employing the ending familiar from the o-stems. We also find the expected ending -а for the plural nominative, accusative, and vocative of neuter nouns.

As with the v-stems, the i-stem declension strongly influenced the n-stem declension. As a result we also find forms such as камєни for the genitive singular камєнє. Occasionally we also find an innovative nominative singular камєнь based on the stem found throughout the rest of the paradigm and the nominative singular ending typical of i-stem nouns (a shape reinforced by its being the same as the accusative singular).

The common noun дьнь 'day' shows considerable influence both from the i-stem and the v-stem nouns. Consider its declension as illustrated below.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	дьнь	 	дьни	 	дьнє, дьньє
A	 	дьнь	 	дьни	 	дьни
G	 	дьнє, дьни	 	дьну, дьнью	 	дьнъ, дьновъ, дьньи
L	 	дьнє, дьни	 	дьну, дьнью	 	дьньхъ
D	 	дьни	 	дьньма	 	дьньмъ
I	 	дьньмь, дьнью	 	дьньма	 	дьньми
V	 	дьнь	 	дьни	 	дьни
We find in this paradigm the importing of the instrumental singular ending -ью from the feminine i-stems, while the nominative plural дьньє shows the influence of the masculine i-stems. Moreover we also see the genitive plural дьновъ formed by analogy with the u-stem nouns.

17 Compound Forms of Adjectives
The compound adjectives, also termed long-form or definite adjectives, exhibit endings which derive from a combination of the short-form, twofold endings and the endings of the third person pronoun *и [*jĭ]. At the most basic level, Old Russian simply appends the pronominal forms after the corresponding form of the simple adjective. But the result becomes a phonological unit, and so the resulting combination often undergoes phonetic changes obscuring to some degree the origin of the form.

We may illustrate the basic structure with the nominative and genitive singular forms of the adjective добръ 'good'. Here we treat the Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic forms in parallel. There are two primary reasons for this:

The indigenous Old Russian forms have typically undergone further simplification by the time of the Old Russian texts, making the underlying elements of the compound more difficult to identify;
At all early stages of Old Russian the Old Church Slavonic literary tradition exerted a strong influence on the writing, and so we still encounter OCS forms in the Old Russian texts.
With that in mind, consider the following table.

 	 	Underlying Form	 	OCS	 	Old Russian
N Sg.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc.	 	dobrŭ+jĭ	 	добръи	 	добрыи
Neut.	 	dobro+je	 	доброѥ	 	доброѥ
Fem.	 	dobra+ja	 	добрая	 	добрая
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
G	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc.	 	dobra+jego	 	добраѥго	 	доброго
Neut.	 	dobra+jego	 	добраѥго	 	доброго
Fem.	 	dobry+jeję	 	добрꙑя	 	доброѩ
If w look at the OCS forms, we see from the masculine and neuter forms that the simple adjective forms and the corresponding pronominal forms sit side by side. However, given that the back jer is now in tense position in the masculine nominative form, we expect to find the variant добрꙑи, which is actually the more typical form. Moreover, the feminine genitive form shows that elision of the initial elements of the pronominal forms often accompanies the composition of elements. In the Old Russian forms this tendency towards simplification has been extended. While even within OCS we find assimilation in the masculine and neuter genitive singular leading to forms such as добрааго and then contraction leading to добраго, Old Russian has greatly reduced this form in доброго. Here we find no trace of the twofold genitive singular ending -а. The resulting ending parallels the pronominal ending. The same holds for many of the other forms throughout the paradigm.

17.1 Hard Compound Adjectives
The hard stem compound adjectives derive, straightforwardly enough, from the composition of the hard stem simple adjective forms with the third person pronominal forms. Because of their greater transparency in terms of compositional analysis, as well as for their ubiquity in Old Russian texts, we first list for convenience the proper Old Church Slavonic forms of the adjective добръ 'good'.

OCS	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	добрꙑи	 	доброѥ	 	добраꙗ
A	 	добрꙑи	 	доброѥ	 	добрѫѭ
G	 	добраѥго	 	добраѥго	 	добрꙑѩ
L	 	добрѣѥмь	 	добрѣѥмь	 	добрѣи
D	 	добруѥму	 	добруѥму	 	добрѣи
I	 	добрꙑимь	 	добрꙑимь	 	добрѫѭ
V	 	добрꙑи	 	добоѥ	 	добраꙗ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	добраꙗ	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
A	 	добраꙗ	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
G	 	добрую	 	добрую	 	добрую
L	 	добрую	 	добрую	 	добрую
D	 	добрꙑима	 	добрꙑима	 	добрꙑима
I	 	добрꙑима	 	добрꙑима	 	добрꙑима
V	 	добраꙗ	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	добрии	 	добраꙗ	 	добрꙑѩ
A	 	добрꙑѩ	 	добраꙗ	 	добрꙑѩ
G	 	добрꙑихъ	 	добрꙑихъ	 	добрꙑихъ
L	 	добрꙑихъ	 	добрꙑихъ	 	добрꙑихъ
D	 	добрꙑимъ	 	добрꙑимъ	 	добрꙑимъ
I	 	добрꙑими	 	добрꙑими	 	добрꙑими
V	 	добрии	 	добраꙗ	 	добрꙑѩ
The proper Old Russian forms, listed below, show a greater tendency toward simplifying the junction between adjectival and pronominal endings.

ORuss	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	добрыи	 	доброѥ	 	добрая
A	 	добрыи	 	доброѥ	 	добрую
G	 	доброго	 	доброго	 	доброѩ
L	 	добромь	 	добромь	 	добрѣи
D	 	доброму	 	доброму	 	доброи
I	 	добрыимь	 	добрыимь	 	доброю
V	 	добрыи	 	добоѥ	 	добрая
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	добрая	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
A	 	добрая	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
G	 	доброю	 	доброю	 	доброю
L	 	доброю	 	доброю	 	доброю
D	 	добрыима	 	добрыима	 	добрыима
I	 	добрыима	 	добрыима	 	добрыима
V	 	добрая	 	добрѣи	 	добрѣи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	добрии	 	добрая	 	добрыѣ
A	 	добрыѣ	 	добрая	 	добрыѣ
G	 	добрыихъ	 	добрыихъ	 	добрыихъ
L	 	добрыихъ	 	добрыихъ	 	добрыихъ
D	 	добрыимъ	 	добрыимъ	 	добрыимъ
I	 	добрыими	 	добрыими	 	добрыими
V	 	добрии	 	добрая	 	добрыѣ
We find the greatest simplification, as compared to the OCS forms, in the singular oblique cases. As mentioned earlier we note the reformulation of the masculine and neuter genitive singular ending -а-єго as -ого, with an initial -о- otherwise unexpected from the combining elements -а- and -є-. Similarly we find the feminine genitive singular доброѩ contains о-vocalism where the OCS form does not. We find a similar situation in the dative, with masculine and neuter доброму, and feminine доброи.

Most of the remaining forms are subject to further contraction. For example we often find добрꙑми for добрꙑими in the instrumental plural, and likewise for other forms of similar shape in the dual and plural.

We also find the results of second palatalization in certain forms of the compound adjective where the stem ends in a velar consonant. The following table lists those forms of вєликъ 'great' which exhibit palatalization.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
L Sg.	 	вєлицѣмь	 	вєлицѣмь	 	вєлицѣи
D	 	 	 	 	 	вєлицѣи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N A V Du.	 	 	 	вєлицѣи	 	вєлицѣи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	вєлиции	 	 	 	 
17.2 Soft Compound Adjectives
The soft compound adjectives correspond to the composition of soft simple twofold adjectives with the corresponding pronominal forms. As above, we list first the Old Church Slavonic forms because of their transparency of composition and their frequent occurrence in the Old Russian texts. The adjective ништь 'poor' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

OCS	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	ништьи	 	ништєѥ	 	ништаꙗ
A	 	ништьи	 	ништєѥ	 	ништѫѭ
G	 	ништаѥго	 	ништаѥго	 	ништѧѩ
L	 	ништиимь	 	ништиимь	 	ништии
D	 	ништюѥму	 	ништюѥму	 	ништии
I	 	ништиимь	 	ништиимь	 	ништѫѭ
V	 	ништьи	 	ништєѥ	 	ништаꙗ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништии	 	ништии
A	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништии	 	ништии
G	 	ништюю	 	ништюю	 	ништюю
L	 	ништюю	 	ништюю	 	ништюю
D	 	ништиима	 	ништиима	 	ништиима
I	 	ништиима	 	ништиима	 	ништиима
V	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништии	 	ништии
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	ништии	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништѧѩ
A	 	ништѧѩ	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништѧѩ
G	 	ништиихъ	 	ништиихъ	 	ништиихъ
L	 	ништиихъ	 	ништиихъ	 	ништиихъ
D	 	ништиимъ	 	ништиимъ	 	ништиимъ
I	 	ништиими	 	ништиими	 	ништиими
V	 	ништии	 	ништаꙗ	 	ништѧѩ
The following chart list the proper Old Russian forms for the adjective син҄ь 'blue'.

ORuss	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	син҄ьи	 	син҄єѥ	 	син҄яя
A	 	син҄ьи	 	син҄єѥ	 	син҄юю
G	 	син҄ѥго	 	син҄ѥго	 	син҄ѥѣ
L	 	син҄ѥмь	 	син҄ѥмь	 	син҄ѥи
D	 	син҄ѥму	 	син҄ѥму	 	син҄ѥи
I	 	син҄имь	 	син҄имь	 	син҄ѥю
V	 	син҄ьи	 	син҄єѥ	 	син҄яя
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ии	 	син҄ии
A	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ии	 	син҄ии
G	 	син҄ѥю	 	син҄ѥю	 	син҄ѥю
L	 	син҄ѥю	 	син҄ѥю	 	син҄ѥю
D	 	син҄има	 	син҄има	 	син҄има
I	 	син҄има	 	син҄има	 	син҄има
V	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ии	 	син҄ии
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	син҄ии	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ѣѣ
A	 	син҄ѣѣ	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ѣѣ
G	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄ихъ
L	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄ихъ	 	син҄ихъ
D	 	син҄имъ	 	син҄имъ	 	син҄имъ
I	 	син҄ими	 	син҄ими	 	син҄ими
V	 	син҄ии	 	син҄яя	 	син҄ѣѣ
We see in the soft stems the same tendency toward reduction as in the hard stems. In the soft stems, however, we tend to find є-vocalism where in the hard stems we found о-vocalism: e.g. masculine genitive singular син҄ѥго versus доброго.

18 The l-Participle
Old Russian, along with Old Church Slavonic and other Slavic languages, employs a particular past participle based on an l-suffix, a suffix with remnants in a handful of other Indo-European branches, Italic most notably among them. This participle, known variously as the l-participle, resultative participle, or the second past participle, does not enjoy as free a use as other past participle formations in Old Russian. Rather, this participle almost exclusively finds employ as the participial component of periphrastic, or compound, verbal formations of the past tense. As such, it exhibits only case endings of the nominative, in agreement with the subject of the periphrastic verb. These endings come from the twofold hard-stem adjective declension. The l-suffix is typically attached to the aorist-infinitive stem of the verb. The following table provides some examples.

Conjugation	 	Infinitive	 	Nom. Sg.	 	Meaning
I	 	нєс-ти	 	нєс-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	having carried
II	 	двиг-ну-ти	 	двиг-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	having moved
 	 	 	 	двиг-ну-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	 
III	 	зна-ти	 	зна-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	having known
IV	 	ход-и-ти	 	ходи-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	having gone
V	 	да-ти	 	да-лъ, -ла, -ло	 	having given
As depicted in the above chart, the l-participle of verbs containing the -ну- suffix can be built onto the stem including the suffix or directly onto the root without the suffix.

The resultative participle of ити 'to go' is built from the special stem шьд-: with regular loss of -д- before -л-, this yields шьлъ, шьла, шило. We see a similar sound change in other verbs with stems ending in a dental. For example у-вяд-ну-ти 'to fade' has resultative participle увялъ, etc.

One interesting feature of the Old Russian resultative participle is the use of endings other than -ъ when the nominative singular masculine is called for. This occurs particularly with the Birchbark Writs. In these documents we find the endings -лє, -лѣ, -ль, -лѧ, -ло in place of the expected -лъ. For example, we find in number 345 the form звало єсмь 'I called' for expected *зъвалъ єсмь.

19 Prefixes & Prepositions
Old Russian, like other Slavic languages in general, and like Old Church Slavonic in particular, employs numerous particles to color the meaning of clauses and phrases. Among these particles verbal prefixes and prepositions factor prominently. We discuss these two types of particles below.

19.1 Prefixes
Old Russian verbal prefixes form an indispensible part of the language. Frequently verbal prefixes double as prepositions, and their use in many ways parallels their use in English. In English verbal prefixes can at times dramatically change the meaning of a verb: compare the unprefixed stand with the prefixed understand. At other times the prefix only changes the original verb's sense slightly if at all: compare stretch to outstretch. The same situation obtains in Old Russian, where some prefixes substantially change the original verb's meaning, while others provide almost no perceptible distinction in sense.

However prefixes in Old Russian also serve in another role: to change the aspect of a verb. In particular, where an unprefixed verb is generally imperfective, the addition of (any) prefix will serve to make the new prefixed verb perfective. Debate surrounds the question as to what degree this had become systematized within the earliest stages of East Slavic, but we do see in the texts the beginning of what has become one of the hallmarks of Russian verbal inflection. We will discuss verbal aspect in somewhat more detail later in these lessons.

For the most part Old Russian displays the same set of verbal prefixes as that found in Old Church Slavonic. Moreover, these prefixes do typically correspond to self-standing prepositions. But there are some noteworthy differences. In particular, вы- is a specifically East and North Slavic prefix, perhaps borrowed from Gothic ut (cf. Eng. out), with the final -t dropping before following consonants. The preposition из often introduces the prepositional phrase which complements or completes the meaning of the associated verb with prefix вы-. And the particle въз- appears only as a prefix within East Slavic. Likewise пєрє- only assumes the role of a prefix in East Slavic.

The following table lists some of the most pervasive verbal prefixes, along with the basic sense each one imparts to the verb to which it is affixed. Finally the last two columns provide examples of these senses and an accompanying translation.

Prefix	 	Sense	 	Example	 	Meaning
вы-	 	out	 	вꙑходити из...	 	to go out of
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
из-	 	out, thoroughly	 	изѣдати	 	to eat up, devour
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
въз-	 	(inception)	 	възлюбити	 	to fall in love
 	 	(iteration, 're-')	 	въздати	 	to return, give back
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
за-	 	(inception)	 	зажєщи	 	to ignite, catch fire
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
на-	 	(accumulation)	 	насꙑтити сѧ	 	to eat one's fill
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
о-, об-	 	(pftv. of state change)	 	окамєнити	 	to turn to stone, petrify
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
пєрє-, прѣ-	 	through, over	 	прѣступити	 	to cross a threshold
 	 	excessively (adj.)	 	прѣмъного	 	exceedingly much
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
по-	 	forth (direction)	 	поити	 	to set out
 	 	(perfective)	 	почьстити	 	to honor
19.2 Prepositions
In the parent language Proto-Indo-European, what we now call prepositions functioned for the most part as self-standing adverbs that would color a sentence as a whole, but which would not be associated with any particular word in the sentence. It seems that the case system was robust enough to distinguish sufficiently the grammatical functions of the various substantives in a sentence. We still see this adverbial use of later prepositions in some of the most archaic documents of the language family, namely in the Homeric epics of Greece and the Vedas of India.

But as the various daughter languages evolved, we see that many of them began to simplify the case system, sometimes drastically. Slavic for its part preserves many of the cases reconstructed for PIE, though it does lose the ablative case for example. As cases fell away, the remaining cases ended up taking up the slack: for example not only does the Old Russian genitive denote possession, as the PIE genitive, but it can also denote the origin or source, a sense originally denoted by the ablative. As a given case came to denote a variety of different meanings, the adverbs served to pluck out from among the different choices the particular meaning intended. And as this became more frequent, and more necessary, the adverbs gravitated closer and closer to the nouns until, in Slavic, they came to stand directly before the noun as a preposition.

Old Russian prepositions often govern a variety of cases. Because of the development described above, the sense a preposition imparts often corresponds closely to the case governed: in fact it is the preposition-case unit that has meaning, and not the preposition alone within Old Russian. For example, the preposition въ can mean either 'in' or 'into'. But since the locative case naturally denotes the location, then въ only means 'in' when governing the locative. Likewise, since the accusative can denote the goal of directed motion, then въ only means 'into' when governing the accusative.

Of course any language is much more robust than any theoretical description, and this is particularly true of Old Russian. Hence we find some preposition-case combinations where it is not clear how the original meaning of the case would correspond naturally to the overall sense imparted. We must therefore learn the preposition-case combinations together by rote. The following chart provides a list of the most common prepositions in Old Russian texts, along with the cases they govern and the particular sense elicited in combination with each case. The last two columns provide examples together with translations.

Preposition	 	Case	 	Sense	 	Example	 	Meaning
въ	 	A	 	into (direction)	 	въ деревѣ	 	to Dereva
 	 	L	 	in (place)	 	въ деревѣхъ	 	in Dereva
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
до	 	G	 	until, up to	 	до сєго дьнє	 	up to this day
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
за	 	A	 	for, after, behind (direction)	 	за кънязь	 	after the prince
 	 	G	 	because of	 	за обычая	 	by (force of) habit
 	 	I	 	after, behind (place)	 	за морємъ	 	across the sea
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
из	 	G	 	from, out of, out from	 	из града	 	out from the city
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
къ	 	D	 	to, toward	 	къ цѣсарю	 	to the emperor
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
на	 	A	 	onto (direction)	 	на чьсть вєлику	 	for a great honor
 	 	L	 	on (place)	 	на горѣ	 	on the hill
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
надъ	 	A	 	over, above (direction)	 	надъ вєрхъ	 	over the top
 	 	I	 	over, above (place)	 	надъ гробъмь єго	 	over his grave
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
о, об	 	A	 	over, round, about (direction)	 	о зємлю	 	over the earth
 	 	L	 	over, round, about (place)	 	о собѣ	 	by themselves
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
отъ	 	G	 	from, out of (source)	 	отъ града	 	out from the city
 	 	G	 	by, by means of (agent)	 	отъ Бога	 	by God
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
по	 	A	 	below, through, for	 	по дань	 	in pursuit of tribute
 	 	L	 	after, because of, for	 	по мужи своємь	 	for her husband
 	 	D	 	on, about (direction, extent)	 	по странамъ	 	across the lands
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
подъ	 	A	 	under (direction)	 	подъ кровъ мои	 	(enter) under my roof
 	 	I	 	under (place)	 	подъ ногами вашими	 	under your feet
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
при	 	L	 	near, at the time of	 	при вєчєрѣ	 	toward evening
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
прѣдъ	 	A	 	before, in front of (direction)	 	прѣдъ Богъ	 	before God
 	 	L	 	before, in front of (place)	 	пєрєдъ людьми	 	in the presence of good people
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
съ	 	A	 	for the extent of	 	съ другую сторону	 	on the other side
 	 	G	 	down from, away, off	 	съ Дону вєликаго	 	from the great Don
 	 	I	 	with (association)	 	съ сꙑнъмь своимь	 	with her son
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
у	 	G	 	at (place)	 	у гроба	 	at the tomb
20 Adjective Use
We have seen that adjectives fall into two broad categories: definite and indefinite. This distinction has a clear morphological realization: the indefinite forms of the adjective take endings derived from the twofold nominal declension, while definite adjectives append to these twofold forms the corresponding forms of the third person pronoun *и. Old Russian in fact further refines the definite forms of the adjectives by blurring the boundary between nominal and pronominal endings.

But originally the distinction between definite and indefinite adjectives lies on another, perhaps more fundamental, level, one which becomes clearer upon comparison with other early remnants of the Slavic languages. In particular, the indefinite adjectives originally served to modify an as yet unspecified referent, whereas the definite adjectives modified specific referents. We may compare with English. The Old Church Slavonic phrase добръ мѫжь, employing an indefinite adjective form, most closely parallels the English phrase 'a good man'. By contrast the Old Church Slavonic phrase добръи мѫжь, employing a definite adjective form, most closely parallels the English phrase 'the good man'. In the simplest sense, the addition of the pronoun *и to the simple adjective forms serves the same function as the definite article the serves in English. The lack of the pronominal forms corresponds to the English use of the indefinite article a or an. More generally, compound adjectival forms generally modify nouns whose referents have already been introduced into the narrative at an earlier stage and are assumed known to the reader or listener: the compound adjectives point back to that previously introduced element.

However when we look closely at the situation in Old Russian, this distinction seems early to have started breaking down. In fact we find that the particular case form involved seems to play a role in the choice between definite and indefinite adjective forms: the definite adjective forms seem to be prevalent in the masculine and neuter instrumental singular, and in the genitive and locative of all genders (Schmalstieg 1996).

Modern Russian usage employs the long-form (definite) adjective in attributive position, the short-form (indefinite) in predicate position. We find this tendency already in place in Old Russian texts. For example we find in the Primary Chronicle: отроци Свѣньлжи изодѣлися сѹть... а мꙑ нази "Sveinald's retainers are clothed... but we (are) naked." In this example нази 'naked' is the short-form adjective, here used predicatively. But we also find such short-forms used attributively, as in the following example, also from the Primary Chronicle: тꙑ кънязь єси мудръ и съмꙑсльнъ "You are a wise and prudent prince". Here мудръ 'wise' and съмꙑсльнъ 'prudent' modify кънязь 'prince' attributively. Moreover we find instances of the long-form (definite) adjective used predicatively: кто посль живꙑи ѡстанѣть сѧ 'whoever will remain alive afterwards'. Here the long-form живꙑи of живъ 'alive' is predicate to кто 'whoever'.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 5
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
IV. The Path to Christianity in Early Russia
The second defining event of the early Russian state is the adoption of Christianity by prince Vladimir in 988 AD. In the simplest terms the fundamental reason for the singular importance of this event is that, as with the Southern Slavs before them, it is only with the arrival of Christianity that the Eastern Slavs enter the larger European historical record. The importation of Christianity brought with it a preoccupation with text, specifically with the text of the Bible, and this focus on the written word served to spur a culture of writing and bookish learning to a degree that had not yet been seen among the Eastern Slavs. The literary documents which provide us with a window into early East Slavic culture, and into the language which distinguished it, owe their very existence to this newfound interest in the written word.

But the second aspect of Christianity's adoption among the Rus that had dramatic repercussions for the rest of East Slavic history was how it occurred. Specifically the fact that Vladimir accepted the Christian teachings espoused by the clergy at Byzantium meant that the East Slavs remained politically aligned with Byzantium and focused on points east. This had the effect of putting up a sort of barrier between them and the rest of Western Europe, and so early Russia therefore neglected to take part in many of the cultural and religious movements that characterized the transition of Western Europe out of the Middle Ages and into the Modern Age.

Such a momentous decision obviously did not take place in a vacuum. We must therefore attempt to understand Vladimir's acceptance of the Byzantine recension in the context of the times.

IV.i The Historical Context
Already in the fourth century AD Christianity had found adherents north of the Black Sea. In particular the Goths had adopted Christianity, though they subscribed to the heretical teachings of Arius, who opposed the doctrine of Trinitarianism, whereby the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are supposed to be of the "same essence". But as the Huns invaded the region, the Goths were dislodged and a primary foothold of Christianity along the expanding steppe left with them. Following the Goths' departure numerous systems of belief, ranging from Islam, brought by Arabs to the shores of Greece, to paganism, brought by the Avars into Pannonia, began to vie for dominance in the reaches of Eastern Europe.

Christianity made its reentrance to Eastern Europe with the expansion of Charlemagne's empire in the late 8th century. It was Charlemagne who pushed out from his Frankish homeland and drove the Avars from their seat along the Danube. This reintroduced Christianity to the eastern frontier of Europe and opened a wave of Germanic missionary work. Moreover, Charlemagne legitimized his ascension by linking himself directly to the papal seat of power in Rome. This provided a model of imperial expansion and legitimation which numerous princes throughout Western Europe sought to emulate.

It was in this context that the princes of Moravia sent to Byzantium for missionaries. They had grown weary of encroachment by German-speaking missionaries who gave the liturgy in Latin. And so Constantine (later Cyril) and Methodius made their famous entrance into history in the middle of the 9th century by translating the liturgy into Old Church Slavonic in their various travels to Moravia.

Though the introduction of Byzantine Christianity to Moravia provided a strong bond between Byzantium and a large part of the Slavic world at the time, the Eastern Slavs for their part still let it be known that they were not immediately prone to being fast friends with the Byzantine Empire. Already in the early 9th century the Rus had pillaged the Byzantine city of Amastris. Byzantium subsequently militarized Cheronesus (Korsun) in the Crimea to protect its shipping routes in the Black Sea.

To add insult to injury, in 860 the Rus attacked Byzantium unexpectedly with 200 ships. As a consequence Byzantium struck an alliance with the Khazars in an effort to protect themselves from the Rus. But on a more conciliatory front, Byzantium sent a mission to convert the Rus to Christianity, with the hope of persuading them to a more friendly disposition toward the empire. Evidently this plan met with some success, as in 867 the Rus accepted a bishop.

But the strengthening of ties between Byzantium and the emerging Russian state only proceeded in fits and starts. Shortly thereafter, in 907, prince Oleg of Kiev attacked Byzantium to guarantee Rus trade rights with the empire. This was followed in 941 by a campaign led by Oleg's successor Igor, who also attacked Byzantium with a view to secure trade rights. Ultimately they were repulsed by the Greek fire, but undeterred Igor again led a force against Byzantium in 943. The emperor quickly agreed to reinstate the basic principles of the treaty struck after Oleg's original campaign, and Igor departed without entering the city.

Shortly after Igor's death at the hands of a regional tribe harried by his unceasing appetite for tribute, the Byzantine missions gained an unexpected convert. Sometime between 954-956 Igor's widow Olga, mother of Svjatoslav, is baptized in Byzantium. But upon assuming power Svjatoslav rejected Christianity and began a fierce offensive against neighboring kingdoms.

After defeating the Khazars to the southeast, Svjatoslav turns west in 968 at the behest of the Byzantine emperor to attack and defeat the Bulgarians along the Danube. He returns abruptly to Kiev as it falls under attack from the Pechenegs. Repulsing the Pecheneg onslaught, Svjatoslav decides he no longer wishes to remain in Kiev, and returns to Bulgaria to dethrone tsar Boris II and set up a capital at Pereiaslavets on the Danube. Svjatoslav's plans are thwarted when, in 971, the new Byzantine emperor defeats the Bulgarians, now allied with Svjatoslav, and reinstalls Boris II. Svjatoslav is forced to surrender and come to terms: he must cease his attacks on the Byzantine Empire, particularly in the Crimea, and must send military aid when requested. As Svjatoslav returns from Bulgaria to Kiev, he is attacked by the Pechenegs on the Dnieper. He is killed and his skull used by the Pecheneg leader as a drinking vessel. The Russian throne falls to Svjatoslav's son Jaropolk, who maintains power for less than a decade before being deposed by his brother Vladimir.

This is the sequence of events leading up to Vladimir's decision to convert to Christianity. The Primary Chronicle recounts the process by which he arrives at his decision. Briefly, Vladimir sends envoys to the centers of practice of the major religions: Islam, Judaism, Western Christianity, and Eastern Orthodox Christianity. The envoys are impressed with Byzantium's Church of St. Sophia, and their report convinces Vladimir to accept Eastern Christianity. Vladimir subsequently attacks Cheronesus in the Crimea, and in exchange for not attacking Byzantium in the same fashion, he wins the hand of Anna, the Byzantine emperor's daughter, in marriage.

The Primary Chronicle therefore portrays the decision as a wise comparison of the major religions of the surrounding regions, in which Vladimir bases his decision on the obvious superiority of Byzantine worship. But the Primary Chronicle leaves out some crucial details (Majeska, 2009):

Vladimir already knew all these faiths. For example the Khazars were Jews and Svjatoslav had recently defeated them; the Bulgars on the Volga practiced Islam.
Christianity was already gaining sway among the Varangians: Olga had been baptized, and some Christian Varangians in Kiev had been killed for refusing to take part in pagan sacrifice.
It seems plausible, therefore, that Vladimir's decision was informed not only by a sage comparison of faiths, but also by the political exigencies that often force the hand of forward-leaning leaders. In particular we can isolate at least four different factors surrounding Vladimir's conversion that likely pushed him toward Byzantium (Majeska 2009):

Vladimir captured Kiev from his brother Jaropolk with the assistance of a Viking force; they were now demanding payment.
In 988 Vladimir sent 6,000 warriors to assist the Byzantine emperor Basil II in putting down a rebellion with forces directly threatening Byzantium itself.
German emperor Otto II had sought Anna's hand in marriage but was rebuked as being of insufficient prestige.
Christianity was rapidly spreading across Northern and Eastern Europe as a means of attaining prestige among the Western European empires.
Vladimir would not have been immune to consideration of the obvious benefits. On the one hand, as a Christian Vladimir would gain respect throughout the other European empires. On the other hand, by marrying Anna, Vladimir would immediately gain higher status than Otto II. The drawback, of course, was that to marry Anna Vladimir would have to accept the Eastern Orthodoxy. But Vladimir had likely already decided to do this. So finally, in 989, Vladimir declared Eastern Christianity the national religion of the Rus.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The passage below describes how Olga, not content with the punishment exacted, seeks further retribution with Derevlian visitors. Having done all she can to the envoys of the Derevlians, she determines to visit destruction upon the Derevlians in their own land. She couches her answers to the Derevlians' inquiries in oblique references to hide her intents, and she once more exacts revenge on the unsuspecting nobles. The extract lists lines 71-101.

71-74 - пославши ѡльга къ деревлѧномъ рече имъ, да аще мѧ просити право, то пришлите мужа нарочитꙑ, да в велицѣ чти приду за вашь кнѧзь. єда не пѹстѧть мене людьє києвьстии.
 Collapse All
пославши -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- having sent
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
деревлѧномъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- ...
аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- If
мѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <азъ> I -- me
просити -- verb; infinitive of <просити, -шѫ, -сиши> ask, demand -- to seek
право -- adjective; neuter nominative singular of <правъ> just, right, proper -- (it is) proper
то -- conjunction; <то> but, then, therefore -- then
пришлите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <присълати, -лѭ, -лѥши> send -- send
мужа -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- men
нарочитꙑ -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <нарочитъ> established, well established, noteworthy, notable, noble -- noteworthy
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- so that
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
велицѣ -- adjective; feminine locative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- the highest
чти -- noun; feminine locative singular of <чьсть> honor, rank, reverence, feast, device, pattern -- honor
приду -- verb; 1st person singular present of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- I go
за -- preposition; <за> (w. acc.) after, by, because of, for; (w. instr.) behind; (w. gen.) because of -- to
вашь -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
єда -- adverb; <ѥда> if, if only, would that; that not, lest; unless, otherwise -- Otherwise
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
пѹстѧть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <пѹстити, -штѫ, -стиши> allow, let, free; send (away) -- will... release # Note the use of the present in what here must be construed either as a strict future tense or as a gnomic present (something generally true)
мене -- pronoun; genitive singular of <азъ> I -- me # Note genitive with negation; the preceding use of the pronoun, мѧ, shows the direct object (Olga) in the accusative
людьє -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- the... people
києвьстии -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <кыѥвьскъ> of Kiev, of Kyiv, Kievan -- Kievan # Note the result -ст- of second palatalization of -ск-

74-77 - се слꙑшавше деревлѧне собраша сѧ лучьшиє мужи иже дерьжаху деревьску землю. и послаша по ню.
 Collapse All
се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
слꙑшавше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- When... heard # Note the translation of the participle as a full subordinate clause with temporal force
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
собраша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <събьрати, -бєрѫ, -бєрєши> collect, gather -- (there) gathered
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
лучьшиє -- comparative adjective; masculine nominative plural of <лѹчьи, лѹчє, лѹчьши> better -- the best
мужи -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- men
иже -- relative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <ижє> who, which -- who
дерьжаху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <дръжати, -жѫ, -жиши> hold, have power over, rule -- held power over
деревьску -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- of Dereva
землю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the land
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
послаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- they sent (them)
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
ню -- pronoun; feminine accusative singular of <*и> he -- her

77-79 - деревлѧномъ же пришедъшимъ повелѣ ѡльга мовь створити рькуще сꙇце, измꙑвше сѧ придите ко мнѣ.
 Collapse All
деревлѧномъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
пришедъшимъ -- past participle; masculine dative plural of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- When... arrived # Dative absolute. Note the translation with a full subordinate clause providing temporal force.
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- ordered (them)
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
мовь -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <мовь> a washing, bath -- a bath
створити -- verb; infinitive of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- to take
рькуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- speaking # Note the shift to masculine plural, rather than feminine singular: either agreeing with the plurality of people represented by the term зємлѧ or another example of the genesis of the gerund.
сꙇце -- adverb; <сицє> thus, so -- thus
измꙑвше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <измꙑти, -мꙑѭ, -мꙑѥши> bathe, wash -- (Once you) have washed # Note the use of a past participle to denote an action preceding the action denoted by the imperative.
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- yourselves
придите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- come
ко -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- me

79-82 - ѡни же пережьгоша истопку и влѣзоша деревлѧне. начаша сѧ мꙑти и запроша ѡ нихъ истобъку.
 Collapse All
ѡни -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
пережьгоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прѣжєшти, -жєгѫ, -жєжєши> burn -- they heated
истопку -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <истъбъка> tent, hut; bathhouse -- the bathhouse
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
влѣзоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <вълѣсти, -лѣзѫ, -лѣзєши> enter; descend (into) -- entered
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
начаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- They began
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
мꙑти -- verb; infinitive of <мꙑти, мꙑѭ, мꙑѥши> bathe, wash -- to bathe
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
запроша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <запрѣти, -прѫ, -прєши> close, shut -- they shut
ѡ -- preposition; <о (об)> (w. loc.) around; about, concerning; for; by; (w. instr.) at, by, along; (w. acc.) against -- around
нихъ -- pronoun; masculine locative plural of <*и> he -- them
истобъку -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <истъбъка> tent, hut; bathhouse -- the bathhouse

82-83 - и повелѣ зажечи ꙗ ѿ двєрии. ту изгорѣша вси.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- she gave the command
зажечи -- verb; infinitive of <зажєшти, -жєгѫ, -жєжєши> set on fire, ignite, burn -- to burn
ꙗ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
ѿ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
двєрии -- noun; feminine genitive plural of <двьрь> door, front door, entrance -- the doors
ту -- adverb; <тѹ> there; then -- There
изгорѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <изгорѣти, -рѭ, -риши> burn up -- they... perished (in the flames)
вси -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all

83-87 - и посла къ деревлѧномъ рькущи сице, се ѹже иду к вамъ. да пристроите медꙑ многи въ градѣ идеже ѹбисте мужа моєго, да плачю сѧ надъ гробомъ єго и створю трꙑзну мужю своєму.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
посла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
деревлѧномъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
рькущи -- participle; feminine nominative singular of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- saying
сице -- adverb; <сицє> thus, so -- thus
се -- interjection; <сє> lo, behold -- Lo!
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- Now
иду -- verb; 1st person singular present of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- I will go
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
вамъ -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- So
пристроите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <пристроити, -строѭ, -строиши> prepare, make ready, arrange -- make ready
медꙑ -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <мєдъ, мєдѹ> honey -- honey
многи -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <мъногъ> much, many -- great (quantities of)
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
идеже -- adverb; <идє> where; since; however + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- where
ѹбисте -- verb; 2nd person plural aorist of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- you killed
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
моєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- so that
плачю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn -- I may mourn
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
надъ -- preposition; <надъ> (w. acc. or instr.) over, above -- over
гробомъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <гробъ> grave, ditch -- grave
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
створю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- conduct
трꙑзну -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <тризна, трꙑзна> contest, prize; stadium; trench, track; funeral repast, commemoration of the dead -- a wake
мужю -- noun; masculine dative singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- for... husband
своєму -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- my

87-88 - ѡни же то слꙑшавше съвезоша медꙑ многи зѣло. възвариша.
 Collapse All
ѡни -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
то -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- this
слꙑшавше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- having heard
съвезоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <съвєсти, -зѫ, -зєши> bring together, collect, gather -- gathered
медꙑ -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <мєдъ, мєдѹ> honey -- honey
многи -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <мъногъ> much, many -- great (quantities of)
зѣло -- adverb; <зѣло> very -- exceedingly
възвариша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <възварити, -рѭ, -риши> cook -- They cooked (it)

88-90 - ѡльга же поимши малꙑ дружинꙑ, легъко идущи, приде къ гробу єго.
 Collapse All
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
поимши -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <поѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take, seize -- having gathered
малꙑ -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <малъ> small, young -- a small # For expected neuter accusative singular as substantive: мало дружинъӏ
дружинꙑ -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- retinue
легъко -- adverb; <льгъко> easily -- easily
идущи -- participle; 2nd person feminine nominative singular of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- going
приде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- arrived
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- at
гробу -- noun; masculine dative singular of <гробъ> grave, ditch -- grave
єго -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his

90-92 - плака сѧ по мужи своємъ. и повелѣ людемъ своимъ съсути могилу вєлику, ꙗко соспоша. и повелѣ трꙑзну творити.
 Collapse All
плака -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn -- She wept
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
мужи -- noun; masculine locative singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
своємъ -- adjective; masculine locative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- she ordered
людемъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- people
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
съсути -- verb; infinitive of <съсѹти, съсъпѫ, съсъпєши> collect, heap up -- to heap up
могилу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <могꙑла> grave, tomb, burial mound -- burial mound
вєлику -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- a great
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- so that
соспоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <съсѹти, съсъпѫ, съсъпєши> collect, heap up -- they built (it) up
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- she ordered (them)
трꙑзну -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <тризна, трꙑзна> contest, prize; stadium; trench, track; funeral repast, commemoration of the dead -- a wake
творити -- verb; infinitive of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- to conduct

92-94 - по семь сѣдоша деревлѧне пити. и повелѣ ѡльга ѡтрокомъ своимъ служити пред ними.
 Collapse All
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
семь -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter locative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
сѣдоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <сѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> sit, remain -- sat down
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
пити -- verb; infinitive of <пити, пиѭ, пиѥши> drink -- to drink
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- ordered
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
ѡтрокомъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <отрокъ> boy, servant -- servants
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
служити -- verb; infinitive of <слѹжити, -жѫ, -жиши> minister (to), serve -- to minister
пред -- preposition; <прѣдъ> (w. acc. or instr.) before, in front of -- before
ними -- pronoun; masculine instrumental plural of <*и> he -- them

94-96 - рѣша деревлѧне к ользѣ, кдѣ суть дружина наша, ихъ же послахомъ по тѧ.
 Collapse All
рѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- aksed
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- ...
ользѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
кдѣ -- interrogative adverb; <къдє> where, when -- Where
суть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is
дружина -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- retinue
наша -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- our
ихъ же -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- which # Genitive object, plural with collective sense of дружина
послахомъ -- verb; 1st person plural aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- we sent
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
тѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you

96-97 - ѡна же рече, идуть по мнѣ съ дружиною мужа моєго.
 Collapse All
ѡна -- demonstrative pronoun; feminine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- she
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
идуть -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- They are coming
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
мнѣ -- pronoun; locative singular of <азъ> I -- me
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
дружиною -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- the retinue
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- of... husband
моєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

97-98 - ꙗко ѹпиша сѧ деревлѧне, повеле ѡтрокомъ своимъ пити на нѧ.
 Collapse All
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- As
ѹпиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <ѹпити сѧ, -пьѭ, -пьѥши> become inebriated, get drunk -- had become drunk
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
повеле -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- she ordered
ѡтрокомъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <отрокъ> boy, servant -- servants
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
пити -- verb; infinitive of <пити, пиѭ, пиѥши> drink -- to fall # Taken by most scholars as a scribal error for ити or поити
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- upon
нѧ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them

98-101 - а сама ѿиде кромѣ и повелѣ дружинѣ сѣчи деревлѧне. и исѣкоша ихъ ,є. а ѡльга возъврати сѧ києву и пристрои вои на прокъ ихъ.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- Then
сама -- adjective used as substantive; feminine nominative singular of <самъ> self, oneself -- she
ѿиде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <отити, -идѫ, -идєши> go out, depart -- stepped
кромѣ -- adverb; <кромѣ> (adv., prep. w. gen.) outside, far away, on the side, against -- out
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- commanded
дружинѣ -- noun; feminine dative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- (her) troop
сѣчи -- verb; infinitive of <сѣшти, сѣкѫ, сѣчєши> cut down; scratch, carve; sacrifice, slaughter -- to cut down
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
исѣкоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <исѣшти, сѣкѫ, сѣчєши> cut down; kill, slaughter -- they killed
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- of them
є -- number; <є> five; five thousand -- five thousand
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- Then
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
возъврати -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <възвратити, -штѫ, -тиши> return; turn away; (refl.) leave -- returned
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
києву -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Кꙑєвъ> Kiev, Kyiv (name of a city) -- Kiev # Note the use of the dative to mark the destination, rather than the accusative
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
пристрои -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <пристроити, -строѭ, -строиши> prepare, make ready, arrange -- prepared
вои -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <вой> fighter; (pl.) troops, army -- (her) army
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- against
прокъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative singular of <прокъ> remaining, left over; (subst.) the remnants, the rest -- the rest
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- of them

Lesson Text
71-74 - пославши ѡльга къ деревлѧномъ рече имъ, да аще мѧ просити право, то пришлите мужа нарочитꙑ, да в велицѣ чти приду за вашь кнѧзь. єда не пѹстѧть мене людьє києвьстии. 74-77 - се слꙑшавше деревлѧне собраша сѧ лучьшиє мужи иже дерьжаху деревьску землю. и послаша по ню. 77-79 - деревлѧномъ же пришедъшимъ повелѣ ѡльга мовь створити рькуще сꙇце, измꙑвше сѧ придите ко мнѣ. 79-82 - ѡни же пережьгоша истопку и влѣзоша деревлѧне. начаша сѧ мꙑти и запроша ѡ нихъ истобъку. 82-83 - и повелѣ зажечи ꙗ ѿ двєрии. ту изгорѣша вси. 83-87 - и посла къ деревлѧномъ рькущи сице, се ѹже иду к вамъ. да пристроите медꙑ многи въ градѣ идеже ѹбисте мужа моєго, да плачю сѧ надъ гробомъ єго и створю трꙑзну мужю своєму. 87-88 - ѡни же то слꙑшавше съвезоша медꙑ многи зѣло. възвариша. 88-90 - ѡльга же поимши малꙑ дружинꙑ, легъко идущи, приде къ гробу єго. 90-92 - плака сѧ по мужи своємъ. и повелѣ людемъ своимъ съсути могилу вєлику, ꙗко соспоша. и повелѣ трꙑзну творити. 92-94 - по семь сѣдоша деревлѧне пити. и повелѣ ѡльга ѡтрокомъ своимъ служити пред ними. 94-96 - рѣша деревлѧне к ользѣ, кдѣ суть дружина наша, ихъ же послахомъ по тѧ. 96-97 - ѡна же рече, идуть по мнѣ съ дружиною мужа моєго. 97-98 - ꙗко ѹпиша сѧ деревлѧне, повеле ѡтрокомъ своимъ пити на нѧ. 98-101 - а сама ѿиде кромѣ и повелѣ дружинѣ сѣчи деревлѧне. и исѣкоша ихъ ,є. а ѡльга возъврати сѧ києву и пристрои вои на прокъ ихъ.
Translation
71-74 Olga, having sent to the Derevlians, said to them, "If it is proper to seek me, then send noteworthy men, so that I go to your prince in the highest honor. Otherwise the Kievan people will not release me." 74-77 When the Derevlians heard this, there gathered the best men who held power over the land of Dereva. And they sent them for her. 77-79 When the Derevlians arrived, Olga ordered them to take a bath, speaking thus: "Once you have washed yourselves, come to me." 79-82 And they heated the bathhouse, and the Derevlians entered. They began to bathe, and they shut the bathhouse around them. 82-83 And she gave the command to burn them from the doors. There they all perished in the flames. 83-87 And she sent to the Derevlians, saying thus, "Lo! Now I will go to you. So make ready great (quantities of) honey in the city where you killed my husband, so that I may mourn over his grave and conduct a wake for my husband." 87-88 And having heard this, they gathered exceedingly great (quantities of) honey. They cooked it. 88-90 And Olga, having gathered a small retinue, going easily, arrived at his grave. 87-92 She wept for her husband. And she ordered her people to heap up a great burial mound, so that they built it up. And she ordered them to conduct a wake. 92-94 After this the Derevlians sat down to drink. And Olga ordered her servants to minister before them. 92-96 The Derevlians asked Olga, "Where is our retinue, which we sent for you?" 96-97 And she said, "They are coming after me with the retinue of my husband." 97-98 As the Derevlians had become drunk, she ordered her servants to fall upon them. 98-101 Then she stepped out and commanded her troop to cut down the Dervelians. And they killed 5,000 of them. Then Olga returned to Kiev and prepared her army against the rest of them.
Grammar
21 Further Consonant-Stem Nouns
We have already seen some examples of the declension of consonant stems, or the so-called e-declension, specifically the declension of v-stem and of n-stem nouns. In this section we continue that discussion. The basic outline is the same: the nominative singular shows a special form, but this is replaced by a suffix which remains throughout the rest of the paradigm. To this we append the inflectional endings, characterized by the -є of the genitive singular. With v-stems and n-stems we have not exhausted the suffix types which appear in Old Russian. In the following sections we outline the major stem types that remain.

21.1 s-Stem Nouns
The s-stem declension encompasses a small number of predominantly neuter nouns which occur quite frequently in the texts. Many of these nouns show their Indo-European heritage with striking clarity. For example once we take into account the loss of final *-s in Common Slavic and the loss of intervocalic *-s- in Greek, Old Russian нєбо 'heaven', with genitive singular нєбєсє, recalls morpheme for morpheme its Greek cousin nephos, with genitive singular nephous from earlier *neph-es-os. Other nouns in the declension follow the same basic pattern: an ending -о in the nominative and accusative singular (deriving from an original PIE *-os), but a suffix -єс- persisting throughout the remainder of the paradigm to which the e-declension endings are added.

The neuter noun слово 'word' is cognate with Greek klewos and Sanskrit šravas, both 'fame', and shows Old Russian's close affiliation with Sanskrit in the satem subgroup of languages, where the palatovelar consonants (such as Greek k-) evolved into true palatals (Old Russian с- [s-] and Sanskrit š-). The forms of слово serve to illustrate the Old Russian declension.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	слово	 	словєсѣ	 	словєса
A	 	слово	 	словєсѣ	 	словєса
G	 	словєсє	 	словєсу	 	словєсъ
L	 	словєсє	 	словєсу	 	словєсьхъ
D	 	словєси	 	словєсьма	 	словєсьмъ
I	 	словєсьмь	 	словєсьма	 	словєсы
V	 	слово	 	словєсѣ	 	словєса
We note in the instrumental plural that the ending is -ы rather than the ending -ьми encountered in the paradigm of камы.

By the time of the Old Russian texts the s-declension was no longer productive, that is, new nouns were no longer being adopted into, or inflected according to, this declension. It therefore comes as little surprise that nouns of this declension should appear with inflectional forms adopted from other more productive declensions. For example, the influence of the i-declension can be felt in the alternate genitive and locative singular form словєси. The influence of the o-stem and i-stem nouns is particularly strong in the paradigms of the nouns око 'eye' and ухо 'ear'. These nouns typically occur only in the singular and dual.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual
N	 	око	 	очи	 	 	 	 	 	ухо	 	уши
A	 	око	 	очи	 	 	 	 	 	ухо	 	уши
G	 	очєсє	 	очью	 	 	 	 	 	ушєсє, уха	 	ушью
L	 	очєсє	 	очью	 	 	 	 	 	ушєсє	 	ушью
D	 	очєси	 	очима	 	 	 	 	 	ушєси	 	ушима
I	 	очєсьмь	 	очима	 	 	 	 	 	ушєсьмь	 	ушима
V	 	око	 	очи	 	 	 	 	 	ухо	 	уши
In the singular of ухо we see the intrusion of the o-stem declension with the re-formed genitive singular уха. But in the dual forms of both nouns we see the complete overhall of the declension in accordance with the inflection of the i-stem nouns.

Note that the change к > ч in the paradigm of око and the change х > ш in the paradigm of ухо both arise as a result of first palatalization.

21.2 nt-Stem Nouns
Another small class of consonant-stem nouns is that of the nt-stem declension. These nouns derive from a class showing the suffix *-ent in Proto-Indo-European. In final position this became *-ę in Common Slavic, yielding -ѧ in Old Church Slavonic, but -я or -а in Old Russian due to the general loss of nasalization in vowels. Preceding a vowel-initial ending, however, the tendency to re-analyze syllable boundaries meant that PIE *-ent-V- became Common Slavic *-en-tV-, hence *-ętV-. Thus we find Old Church Slavonic -ѧт- and Old Russian -ят- or -ат- as the suffixes that pervade the rest of the paradigm.

In general the nouns of this declension are diminutives built to other nouns, such as отроча 'child' from отрокъ 'boy, servant' (compare OCS отрочѧ from отрокъ). All nouns in this declension are neuter. Old Russian отроча 'child' and тєля 'calf' illustrate the forms.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural	 	 	 	 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	отроча	 	отрочатѣ	 	отрочата	 	 	 	 	 	тєля	 	тєлятѣ	 	тєлята
A	 	отроча	 	отрочатѣ	 	отрочата	 	 	 	 	 	тєля	 	тєлятѣ	 	тєлята
G	 	отрочатє	 	отрочату	 	отрочатъ	 	 	 	 	 	тєлятє	 	тєляту	 	тєлятъ
L	 	отрочатє	 	отрочату	 	отрочатьхъ	 	 	 	 	 	тєлятє	 	тєляту	 	тєлятьхъ
D	 	отрочати	 	отрочатьма	 	отрочатьмъ	 	 	 	 	 	тєляти	 	тєлятьма	 	тєлятьмъ
I	 	отрочатьмь	 	отрочатьма	 	отрочаты	 	 	 	 	 	тєлятьмь	 	тєлятьма	 	тєляты
V	 	отроча	 	отрочатѣ	 	отрочата	 	 	 	 	 	тєля	 	тєлятѣ	 	тєлята
Some nouns of this declension show interference from the i-stem nouns. Thus дѣтя 'child' has singular forms, such as the genitive дѣтятє, which follow the above pattern, but plural forms influenced by the i-declension: nominative and accusative plural дѣти, genitive plural дѣтьи, locative plural дѣтьхъ, instrumental plural дѣтьми. One feminine noun of particular importance, дєсять 'ten', shows a mixture of forms from nt- and i-declensions. The forms are listed below.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	дєсять	 	дєсяти	 	дєсятє
A	 	дєсять	 	дєсяти	 	дєсяти
G	 	дєсятє	 	дєсяту	 	дєсятъ
L	 	дєсятє	 	дєсяту	 	дєсятьхъ
D	 	дєсяти	 	дєсятьма	 	дєсятьмъ
I	 	дєсятью	 	дєсятьма	 	дєсятьми
V	 	дєсять	 	дєсяти	 	дєсятє
21.3 r-Stem Nouns
The final important class of consonant-stem nouns we will discuss is the r-stem declension. This type of noun shows remnants across a wide range of Indo-European languages, most often including core vocabulary relating to familial affiliations. Thus Latin pater and mater, Greek pate:r and me:te:r, and even their respective equivalents in English: father and mother. In Old Russian, only the feminine nouns мати 'mother' and дъчи 'daughter' remain as members of this class. The forms of мати are as follows.

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N	 	мати	 	матєри	 	матєрє
A	 	матєрь	 	матєри	 	матєри
G	 	матєрє	 	матєру	 	матєръ
L	 	матєрє	 	матєру	 	матєрьхъ
D	 	матєри	 	матєрьма	 	матєрьмъ
I	 	матєрью	 	матєрьма	 	матєрьми
V	 	мати	 	матєри	 	матєри
As may now be expected, this declension also shows interference from the i-stem nouns, so that we also find forms матєри for the genitive and locative singular, as well as for the nominative plural. In addition we occasionally find матєрьи in the genitive plural.

The numberal чєтырє 'four', which only has plural forms, is often listed as an additional member of this class. We list below the plural forms for masculine, neuter, and feminine genders.

 	 	Masc.	 	Neut.	 	Fem.
N Pl.	 	чєтырє	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри
A	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри
G	 	чєтыръ	 	чєтыръ	 	чєтыръ
L	 	чєтырьхъ	 	чєтырьхъ	 	чєтырьхъ
D	 	чєтырьмъ	 	чєтырьмъ	 	чєтырьмъ
I	 	чєтырьмь	 	чєтырьмь	 	чєтырьмь
We occasionally find the form чєтырьма in place of the instrumental plural чєтырьми.

22 Comparative and Superlative Adjectives
Comparison of adjectives refers to patterns whereby a language distinguishes between different degrees in which an adjective may characterize the noun it modifies. In English while a clean room lacks filth, a certain room may obtain this condition to an even greater degree and so be termed a cleaner room. Finally, a particular room may make claim to being the most lacking in filth, and hence the cleanest room. The three adjectival forms clean, cleaner, cleanest represent the different degrees of comparison of the adjective clean. The basic adjective itself, clean, is termed the positive degree. The form cleaner, signifying relatively more of the quality specified by the positive degree, is termed the comparative degree. And the form cleanest, denoting the obtaining of the quality to the maximum degree, is the superlative degree. In English some adjectives mark the comparative and superlative degrees with morphological suffixes, such as the -er and -est of cleaner and cleanest, respectively. Other words possess no such morphological marking for the various degrees, and so English employs the use of qualifying adverbs. For example, the positive degree robust forms the comparative degree via the phrase more robust and the superlative via most robust. Old Russian functions similarly.

The Old Russian comparative degree of adjectives has two forms: the short form and the long form. These should not be confused with the short and long form of (the positive degree of) adjectives, i.e. the simple and compound forms of adjectives. Rather the distinction between the short and long forms of the comparative degree of adjectives derives from the length of the suffix appended to the adjectival base before adding the case endings themselves. This suffix had two forms in Common Slavic: the short form *-jĭš- and the long form *-ějĭš-.

22.1 Short Form of the Comparative
The short form of the comparative adds the suffix *-jĭš- to the basic stem of the adjective. In the masculine nominative singular, the final sibilant is lost, yielding *-jĭ. This form as such does not occur, however: instead we find a compound form where the third person pronoun *и [*jĭ] is added. Thus the masculine nominative singular ending that we actually find in the Old Russian texts is *-jĭjĭ > -ьи, or frequently -ии. The nominative singular of the neuter derives from *-je.

All other case forms append endings to the suffix *-jĭš-. Because the suffix begins with a palatal glide, we find the effects of palatalization in the final consonant of the adjectival base. Several adjectives with recognizable suffixes, in particular -ък- or -ок-, drop this suffix before appending the comparative suffix. For example, the adjective высокъ 'high' drops the suffix -ок-, leaving выс-. To this is added the comparative suffix, which yields a stem выш-ьш-, with palatalization of the original -с- of the stem. We use the forms of вышьш- 'higher' to illustrate the short form comparative paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	вышьи	 	вышє	 	вышьши
A	 	вышьшь	 	вышє	 	вышьшю
G	 	вышьшя	 	вышьшя	 	вышьшѣ
L	 	вышьши	 	вышьши	 	вышьши
D	 	вышьшю	 	вышьшю	 	вышьши
I	 	вышьшємь	 	вышьшємь	 	вышьшєю
V	 	вышьи	 	вышє	 	вышьши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	вышьшя	 	вышьши	 	вышьши
A	 	вышьшя	 	вышьши	 	вышьши
G	 	вышьшю	 	вышьшю	 	вышьшю
L	 	вышьшю	 	вышьшю	 	вышьшю
D	 	вышьшєма	 	вышьшєма	 	вышьшяма
I	 	вышьшєма	 	вышьшєма	 	вышьшяма
V	 	вышьшя	 	вышьши	 	вышьши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	вышьшє	 	вышьшя	 	вышьшѣ
A	 	вышьшѣ	 	вышьшя	 	вышьшѣ
G	 	вышьшь	 	вышьшь	 	вышьшь
L	 	вышьшихъ	 	вышьшихъ	 	вышьшяхъ
D	 	вышьшємъ	 	вышьшємъ	 	вышьшямъ
I	 	вышьши	 	вышьши	 	вышьшями
V	 	вышьшє	 	вышьшя	 	вышьшя
We frequently find the special masculine accusative singular form вышьшь replaced by either the nominative or genitive form. In addition, singular neuter forms occasionally lose the suffix -ьш- in the dative: e.g. neuter dative singular вышю. Moreover the suffix occasionally appears in the singular nominative and accusative: вышьшє.

22.2 Long Form of the Comparative
The long form of the comparative adds the suffix *-ějĭš- to the basic stem of the adjective. In the masculine nominative singular, the final sibilant is lost, yielding *-ějĭ, and written in the Cyrillic script as -ѣи. In the remaining forms the *-š- of the *-ějĭš- suffix persists. Moreover, the initial *-ě- of the suffix derives from an original PIE *-e:- (long-e), and so this caused any preceding velar to undergo the changes ascribed to first palatalization. When this situation obtained, the *-ě- subsequently shifted back to *-a-, leaving the suffix *-ajiš-. Consider for example the comparative of вєликъ 'great': *velik-ějĭš- becomes *velič-ějĭš- with palatalization, then *velič-ajĭš- with backing, leaving вєличаиш- 'greater' as the comparative stem. (Cf. Section 6.2.1 of Lesson 2.)

The adjective старъ 'old' forms the comparative with the long suffix: *star-ějĭš-, yielding the stem старѣиш- 'older'. We use its forms to illustrate the long-form comparative paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	старѣи	 	старѣѥ	 	старѣиши
A	 	старѣишь	 	старѣѥ	 	старѣишю
G	 	старѣишя	 	старѣишя	 	старѣишѣ
L	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши
D	 	старѣишю	 	старѣишю	 	старѣиши
I	 	старѣишємь	 	старѣишємь	 	старѣишєю
V	 	старѣи	 	старѣѥ	 	старѣиши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	старѣишя	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши
A	 	старѣишя	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши
G	 	старѣишю	 	старѣишю	 	старѣишю
L	 	старѣишю	 	старѣишю	 	старѣишю
D	 	старѣишєма	 	старѣишєма	 	старѣишяма
I	 	старѣишєма	 	старѣишєма	 	старѣишяма
V	 	старѣишя	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	старѣишє	 	старѣишя	 	старѣишѣ
A	 	старѣишѣ	 	старѣишя	 	старѣишѣ
G	 	старѣишь	 	старѣишь	 	старѣишь
L	 	старѣишихъ	 	старѣишихъ	 	старѣишяхъ
D	 	старѣишємъ	 	старѣишємъ	 	старѣишямъ
I	 	старѣиши	 	старѣиши	 	старѣишями
V	 	старѣишє	 	старѣишя	 	старѣишѣ
22.3 Comparatives without Positive Bases
In English we frequently find that the comparative and superlative degrees of a certain adjective have phonetically little in common with the positive degree. For example the positive degree good differs markedly from the comparative better and superlative best. Such a collection is suppletive, that is, different lexical roots have come together to fill gaps in the complete paradigm of a given lexical root. Where good lacks a comparative *gooder built from the same base, it has adopted the comparative better properly belonging to a different base.

This process of suppletion in comparative paradigms is common throughout many languages, and Old Russian is no exception. The following table lists a few common adjectives whose comparative shows a different lexical base.

Positive	 	Meaning	 	Comparative Masculine	 	Meaning
вєликъ	 	big	 	бол҄ии	 	bigger
мъногъ	 	much, many	 	вѧщии	 	more
малъ	 	small	 	мьн҄ии	 	smaller
добръ	 	good	 	лѹчии	 	better
 	 	 	 	ѹн҄ии	 	better
22.4 The Superlative
Old Russian displays no special morphological marking of the superlative degree. Rather Old Russian generally forms the superlative by means of a comparative form of an adjective accompanied by a genitive denoting the point of reference: for example вьсѣхъ бол҄ии 'biggest of all'. In addition we find the adverb зѣло 'very' used with the positive base of the adjective to denote the extremes of the attribute described by the adjective. For example, note the expression мєдꙑ мъногꙑ зѣло (acc. pl.) 'very great (quantities of) honey' in the story of Olga's Revenge.

23 Relatives, Interrogatives & Indefinites
23.1 The Relative Pronoun
In the section on the third person pronoun we mentioned in passing that *и forms the basis for the relative pronoun. Relative pronouns are those pronouns which are used to refer back to a noun outside of their own clause. An example in English would be The woman whom you greeted yesterday arrived a few minutes ago. In this example, whom is a relative pronoun: though it functions as a normal pronoun within its own clause, its antecedent woman lies outside of the relative clause whom you greeted yesterday and in the main clause The woman... arrived a few minutes ago. Typically, as in this example, such clauses serve to specify or further define the noun to which the relative pronoun refers, and in some sense they can be thought of as clauses which function as adjectives. Moreover we see in the English example that the relative pronoun takes its case from its function in its own clause. Here whom is the object of greeted and so in the English oblique case, whereas the noun to which it refers, woman, is the subject of the verb arrived of the main clause.

Relative pronouns in Old Russian function analogously to their English cousins. They refer to nouns outside of their own clause and as such take their gender and number from the noun to which they refer. But they take their case from their function in their own clause. Consider the following example, taken from the story of Olga's Revenge: наши кнѧзи добри суть ижє распасли суть дєрєвьску зємлю "Our princes are good, those who cultivated the land of Dereva". Here ижє is masculine plural to agree with кнѧзи, but nominative because it is the subject of распасли суть. Contrast this with the following example: кдѣ суть дружина наша, ихъжє послахомъ по тѧ "Where is our retinue, which we sent for you?" Here ихъжє is genitive because it is the human direct object of the verb послахомъ. Though it should actually be feminine singular to agree with its antecedent дружина, we see an instance of a common shift in Old Russian: the relative pronoun agrees with the logical referent. In this situation, the antecedent дружина actually refers to a group of people, and so logically represents a masculine plural entity. Hence ихъжє is masculine plural.

The following paradigm illustrates the declension of the relative pronoun.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	ижє	 	ѥжє	 	яжє
A	 	ижє	 	ѥжє	 	южє
G	 	єгожє	 	єгожє	 	єѣжє, єяжє
L	 	ємьжє	 	ємьжє	 	єижє
D	 	ємужє	 	ємужє	 	єижє
I	 	имьжє	 	имьжє	 	єюжє
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	яжє	 	ижє	 	ижє
A	 	яжє	 	ижє	 	ижє
G	 	єюжє	 	єюжє	 	єюжє
L	 	єюжє	 	єюжє	 	єюжє
D	 	имажє	 	имажє	 	имажє
I	 	имажє	 	имажє	 	имажє
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	ижє	 	яжє	 	ѣжє, яжє
A	 	ѣжє, яжє	 	яжє	 	ѣжє, яжє
G	 	ихъжє	 	ихъжє	 	ихъжє
L	 	ихъжє	 	ихъжє	 	ихъжє
D	 	имъжє	 	имъжє	 	имъжє
I	 	имижє	 	имижє	 	имижє
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The enclitic suffix жє remains constant throughout the paradigm. Moreover we see from the paradigm and the preceding examples that the nominative forms of the relative pronoun do in fact occur in the extant Old Russian texts. In addition, as with the third person pronouns, the relative pronouns take a prothetic н- when following a preposition: отъ н҄ихъжє 'those by whom'.

23.2 The Interrogative Pronoun & Adjective
The Old Russian interrogative pronoun occurs only with forms that are morphologically singular. In this respect it parallels the English interrogative pronouns who? and what? For example, we do not say *Whats are these?, but rather What are these?. The Old Russian interrogative also functions similarly to the English interrogative in another respect. While Old Russian distinguishes three grammatical genders, the interrogative pronoun distinguishes only two: masculine and feminine on the one hand, and neuter on the other. Just as in English, we would say What is this? when asking, say, about a book lying on a table; but we would say Who is this? when asking about a person, whether male or female. The forms of the interrogative pronoun are as follows.

 	 	Masc./Fem.	 	Neuter
N	 	къто	 	чьто
A	 	къто	 	чьто
G	 	кого	 	чєго
L	 	комь	 	чємь
D	 	кому	 	чєму
I	 	кѣмь	 	чимь
V	 	 	 	 
As is typical, the genitive form кого generally assumes the role of the accusative for animate referents. Several variant forms appear in the literature, including the proper Old Church Slavonic form цѣмь for the instrumental masculine and feminine, showing the effects of the second palatalization. We also find neuter genitive forms чьсо and чєсо, as well as extended forms чьсого and чєсого. The same formation extends to the dative, чьсому and чєсому, as well as to the locative, чєсомь. In addition we find the variants что and even што for the nominative neuter.

Old Russian possesses an interrogative adjective къи 'which? what sort of?'. The following table illustrates the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	къ, къи	 	коє	 	коя
A	 	къ, къи	 	коє	 	кою
G	 	коєго	 	коєго	 	коєѣ, коєя
L	 	коємь	 	коємь	 	коєи
D	 	коєму	 	коєму	 	коєи
I	 	коимь	 	коимь	 	коєю
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	кая	 	цѣи	 	цѣи
A	 	кая	 	цѣи	 	цѣи
G	 	коєю	 	коєю	 	коєю
L	 	коєю	 	коєю	 	коєю
D	 	кыима	 	кыима	 	кыима
I	 	кыима	 	кыима	 	кыима
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	кои, ции	 	кая	 	кыѣ
A	 	коѣ	 	кая	 	кыѣ
G	 	коихъ	 	коихъ	 	коихъ
L	 	коихъ	 	коихъ	 	коихъ
D	 	коимъ	 	коимъ	 	коимъ
I	 	коими	 	коими	 	коими
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The nominative masculine singular shows a variant form кыи due to the tense position of the back jer. The masculine and neuter instrumental singular also show the variant кыимь, while the dative and instrumental dual show a contracted form кыма. In the plural we find the variant кыѣ of the masculine accusative, as well as цѣми for the instrumental, and кыихъ for the genitive and locative.

23.3 Indefinite Pronouns & Adjectives
The pronouns къто 'who?' and чьто 'what?' function not only as interrogatives, but also as indefinites: къто 'someone, anyone'; чьто 'something, anything'. They share this feature with many of their Indo-European relatives, such as the interrogatives like Latin quis and Sanskrit kas.

In addition Old Russian may add the prefix нѣ- to the interrogative to form an indefinite pronoun: нѣкъто 'someone, anyone'. The same prefix may be applied to the interrogative adjective to form an indefinite adjective: нѣкъи 'some, a certain'. By contrast the prefix ни-, when attached to an interrogative, results in the corresponding negative. Thus from къто we derive be means of this prefix the negative pronoun: никъто 'no one'. And similarly we derive the negative adjective from the interrogative adjective: никъи 'no, not a'.

24 Compound Tense Formation
Old Russian forms certain tenses predominantly, or in certain instances exclusively, by means of periphrastic, or compound, structures. Typically these involve a finite form of the verb быти 'to be', accompanied by an l-participle modifying the subject. Other formations employ infinitives as complements to conjugated auxiliary verbs.

24.1 The Perfect
Old Russian inherits the Proto-Indo-European perfect formation in a single form: вѣдѣ 'I know', archaically 'I have seen'. This derives from PIE *uoida > *uoida+i > CS *vědě > вѣдѣ in both Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic. Compare Greek (w)oida and Sanskrit veda, both 'I know', and which provide perfect morpheme-for-morpheme counterpoints. In all other instances, however, Old Russian forms what may formally be called the perfect tense by means of a periphrastic construction involving the appropriate nominative form of the resultative participle and the present tense of the verb быти 'to be'. The verb нєсти 'to carry' provides an example of the perfect paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine	 	Meaning
1 Sg.	 	нєслъ єсмь	 	нєсло єсмь	 	нєсла єсмь	 	I (have) carried
2	 	нєслъ єси	 	нєсло єси	 	нєсла єси	 	you (have) carried
3	 	нєслъ єсть	 	нєсло єсть	 	нєсла єсть	 	he/she/it (has) carried
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсла єсвѣ	 	нєслѣ єсвѣ	 	нєслѣ єсвѣ	 	we two (have) carried
2	 	нєсла єста	 	нєслѣ єста	 	нєслѣ єста	 	you two (have) carried
3	 	нєсла єста	 	нєслѣ єста	 	нєслѣ єста	 	they two (have) carried
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсли єсмъ	 	нєсла єсмъ	 	нєслы єсмъ	 	we (have) carried
2	 	нєсли єстє	 	нєсла єстє	 	нєслы єстє	 	you (have) carried
3	 	нєсли суть	 	нєсла суть	 	нєслы суть	 	they (have) carried
The morphology of the Old Russian perfect presents few challenges. Far more difficult, however, is understanding precisely its function as distinct from other past tenses. Typically the perfect tense (really a verbal aspect, rather than a tense, and not to be confused with the perfective aspect, which we will discuss later in this series) denotes what is commonly described as a 'past action with present relevance'. A slightly more precise phrasing, yet one that remains unfortunately vague nonetheless, is that the perfect tense denotes a past action resulting in a state that persists up through the moment of utterance. Consider the following example from English: the simple past I ate versus the perfect tense I have eaten. Both refer to a past action, but the latter implies a state of being which persists until the moment of utterance: loosely speaking, I have eaten suggests that the speaker is in a state of satiety, or of not having an empty stomach, at the moment of utterance.

The question for Old Russian, then, is: which type does the Old Russian perfect belong to? Is it equivalent to English I ate or to English I have eaten? The simple answer is that the situation remains unclear. In part, this is because it is difficult to tease out of the extant texts the author's intention in many circumstances. However the modern use of the l-participle in the formation of a simple past tense suggests that Old Russian too could view the perfect as a simple past. Thus we may rephrase the question: did the perfect formation ever have an interpretation as a true perfect in Old Russian? A good check would be parallelism: we must verify whether Old Russian perfects are coordinated with present tenses, suggesting that the perfects denote a state felt to have present force. Even with this concrete method of characterization, the data is mixed. We do in fact find coordination with present forms, but the context occasionally leads to difficulty in precise interpretation:

изодѣли сѧ суть ѡружьємъ и портꙑ а мꙑ нази: From the Story of Olga's Revenge, line 3. Literally (They) have dressed themselves with weapons and garments, but we (are) naked. The present tense form єсмъ must be supplied in the last phrase, but the parallelism with the present tense suggests a true perfect tense rendering for изодѣли сѧ суть.
почто идєши ѡпѧть? поималъ єси всю дань: Also from the Story of Olga's Revenge, line 18. Literally Why do you come back? You have taken all the tribute. But also permissible in this context would be an English rendering of you took all the tribute.
It seems that the Old Russian perfect early rendered a true perfect tense. As the language developed, the perfect took on the sense of a simple past, and at the same time there was a tendency to drop the accompanying forms of the copula, leaving only the participle.

24.2 The Pluperfect
The pluperfect essentially represents a perfect shifted back in time. That is, the pluperfect represents an action completed before (and creating a state enduring up to) another past time or action. In English, the pluperfect of eat is had eaten, for example. The Old Russian formation of the pluperfect parallels that of the perfect, replacing the present tense forms of быти 'to be' with forms from the imperfect бѣахъ, etc., or from the aorist быхъ, etc., or бѣхъ, etc. The verb нєсти 'to carry' illustrates the paradigm.

 	 	Masc./Neut./Fem.	 	Imperfect	 	 	 	Aorist
1 Sg.	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	бѣахъ	 	/	 	быхъ
2	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	бѣашє	 	/	 	бы
3	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	бѣашє	 	/	 	бы
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	бѣаховѣ	 	/	 	быховѣ
2	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	бѣашєта	 	/	 	быста
3	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	бѣашєта	 	/	 	быста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	бѣахомъ	 	/	 	быхомъ
2	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	бѣашєтє	 	/	 	быстє
3	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	бѣаху	 	/	 	быша
24.3 The Future
Old Russian displays no morphological forms which serve uniquely to express the future. Instead Old Russian generally employs present tense forms where context dictates a future meaning. This parallels English usage of present progressive forms, as in I am going to the store in five minutes. Generally speaking such uses of the present forms to denote future action display verbal prefixes as befits the nascent system of marking of Slavic perfective aspect. But this tendency does not seem to have hardened into a set rule in the earliest Old Russian texts. Some verbs, such as дати 'to give', frequently omit the prefix in contexts where the present tense forms must be interpreted with future meaning.

We find a second future formation in Old Russian which parallels English constructions with an auxiliary and complement, as in I will jog or I shall jog. In Old Russian, several verbs form a periphrastic future by employing the infinitive in conjunction with a conjugated form of an auxiliary verb. The following verbs typically function as auxiliaries in periphrastic future formations: начати, почати, учати, all 'to begin'; хотѣти 'to want, will'; имѣти 'to have'; яти 'to take'. For example, from the Primary Chronicle we have єлижє камєнь начьнєть плавати "... even if a stone will float". In such constructions it seems that the auxiliary may at times retain some of its own basic meaning. Again the Primary Chronicle provides an example: родилъся єсть дѣтищь въ Жидъхъ, ижє хощєть погубити Егупьтъ "A child has been born among the Jews who will (wants to) destroy Egypt." The context does not make clear whether хотѣти 'to want' retains its original meaning or serves simply to mark the future.

24.4 The Future Perfect
Old Russian forms a periphrastic future perfect in a manner analogous to that of the perfect and pluperfect. This employs an l-participle in conjunction with the "future" forms of быти 'to be': буду, будєши, будєть, etc., forms which are formally present tense but which carry a future sense "will be". The future perfect, as its name suggests, amounts to a perfect sense shifted forward in time. That is, a future perfect form stipulates that, as of a certain future point in time or future action, the action denoted by the verb form will already have been completed, and the ensuing state will continue up to that other future point in time. For comparison, the future perfect of English I eat is I will have eaten: as of some point in the future, my act of eating will be over, and the resulting lack of hunger will endure up to that future point in time. The verb нєсти 'to carry' once again serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masc./Neut./Fem.	 	Future
1 Sg.	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	буду
2	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	будєши
3	 	нєслъ, -ло, -ла	 	будєть
 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	будєвѣ
2	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	будєта
3	 	нєсла, -лѣ, -лѣ	 	будєта
 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	будємъ
2	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	будєтє
3	 	нєсли, -ла, -лы	 	будуть
25 The Nominative & Vocative Cases
25.1 The Nominative Case
In Old Russian the nominative case serves to mark the subject of a finite (conjugated) verb. The verb may be explicitly stated or merely implied by context.

25.1.1 Subject & Predicate

Still in Old Russian the nominative case serves not only to mark the subject of a finite verb, but also to mark any substantive or adjective predicated to the subject. This provides a marked distinction between Old Russian and modern Russian: in the latter some or all of the predicate is frequently placed in the instrumental. This is a later innovation within Russian. The earlier state of affairs, with both subject and predicate in the nominative, displays the linguistic state inherited from Common Slavic and recapitulates the norm not only among close relatives like Old Church Slavonic, but also among more distant relatives like Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit. The following excerpts provide examples in which the element predicated to the subject is a noun:

нарицаху сѧ полѧне 'they were called Polianians' (Primary Chronicle). Compare modern Russian они назывались полянами.
аще бо бы кыи перевозьникъ былъ, то не бы ходилъ цѣсарюграду 'For if Kyi had been a ferryman, he would not have gone to Byzantium' (Primary Chronicle).
By contrast the following examples contain an adjective as the predicate nominative:

отроци Свѣньлжи изодѣлися суть... а мꙑ нази 'Sveinald's retainers are clothed... but we (are) naked' (Olga's Revenge).
тꙑ кънязь єси мудръ и съмꙑсльнъ 'You are a wise and prudent prince' (Olga's Revenge).
люба ми єсть рѣчь ваша 'Your proposal is pleasing to me' (Olga's Revenge).
Old Russian also employs the nominative case when quoting names or giving titles. The following provide examples of the nominative used for naming:

Лѣтописьць въ кратъцѣ отъ Авъгѹста дажє и до Кѡнстантина и Зѡꙗ цєсарь грьчьскꙑихъ 'The chronicle in short, from Augustus up to Constantine and Zoe, Greek emperors' (Collection of Prince Svjatoslav).
бѣ бо имѧ єму малъ 'For his name was Mal' (Olga's Revenge).
25.1.2 The Nominative with Infinitive

Old Russian also shows instances of a peculiar construction involving the nominative with the infinitive. The peculiarity of the construction lies in the fact that the nominative which accompanies the infinitive generally must be construed as the object of the action signified by the infinitive. Thus one would either expect the noun to be in the accusative case or expect the infinitive to be passive (or reflexive, i.e. accompanied by ся). Neither of these tends to obtain. Consider the following examples of the nominative accompanied by the infinitive:

Аже будѣте холъпъ убитъ .а. гривна серьбра заплатити 'If a slave will be killed, 1 grivna of silver (is) to be paid' (Smolensk Treaty). A гривна is a unit of money. As the translation stands, the nominative гривна would suit a passive infinitive, but the statement lacks the reflexive particle ся to make such an interpretation explicit. By contrast we might force a translation with an active infinitive in English: 'If a slave will be killed, (it is) to pay 1 grivna'. In such a construction, however, we would expect the accusative гривну.
как мука сєяти 'How to sift flour' (House Orderer [Domostroj]). Again, мука 'flour' by sense acts as the direct object of the infinitive, yet we find the nominative instead.
даи Богъ исправити правда новгородская 'May God permit (us) to establish the law of Novgorod' (Russian Truth [Russkaja Pravda]). Here we see that the nominative form правда ногородская can unambiguously be excluded from consideration as a functional (as opposed to morphological) nominative, since Богъ 'God' already provides a nominative subject for the only conjugated verb, даи, in the clause.
We also find the infinitive as the complement to an adjective in the nominative. Consider the following example of a nominative adjective with infinitive: вода же мутна велми и сладка пити 'The water is very turbid and sweet to drink' (Abbot Daniel). Here we see, in fact, that English permits the same construction. Allow momentarily the use of the case structure originally inherited by English: Old English showed nominative, genitive, dative, and accusative cases, and occasionally an instrumental. Viewed from this perspective, turbid and sweet must be nominative as predicates to water, but they also seem to represent the object of the action represented by the infinitive to drink and for this reason should be accusative.

25.2 The Vocative Case
The Old Russian vocative provides the case of direct address, the case marking the person or thing whom the speaker is addressing. This case only distinguishes itself from the nominative in the singular of masculine and feminine nouns. Consider the following example of the vocative of nouns: о бояне, солобию стараго врємєни 'O Bojan, nightingale of old time(s)' (Igor Tale).

The vocative form for adjectives typically agrees with the nominative in all numbers when the adjective is not being used as a substantive. The following examples show nouns in the vocative modified by accompanying adjectives:

братйе, приступивъше, сконьчаите служьбу башю 'Brothers, having stepped forward, complete your mission' (Boris & Gleb). Here братйе is the vocative of the noun братья 'brothers', a noun collective in sense but singular in form.
увы мнѣ, кънаже нашь милыи и драгыи и блаженыи, водителю слѣпыимъ, одеже нагымъ, старости жьзле, казателю нє наказымъ 'Woe (is) to me, o wretched, dear, blessed prince of ours, o leader to the blind, o vestment to the naked, o walking staff for old age, o instructor to the uninstructed' (Boris & Gleb).
In the dual and plural of all nouns, the vocative and nominative forms are identical. Moreover, we frequently find the nominative used in place of the vocative even when a distinct vocative form is available. Consider the following example of the nominative used in place of the vocative: Марѳа 'Martha!' (Ostromir Gospel, Luke 10.41). Here the expected a-stem vocative would be *Марѳо.

Rarely, we find instances where the vocative appears in situations where we would expect the nominative. The following example shows the vocative used in place of nominative: се въдале варламе святому съпасу зємлю и огородъ... 'Indeed Varlaam gave to the Holy Savior (monastery) land and a garden...' (Gribble, 1973, p. 122). The context suggests that the vocative forms въдале варламе function as the subject of the statement, and so we would expect the nominative *въдалъ варламъ.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 6
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
IV.ii Pre-Christian Beliefs
Interestingly Vladimir had also sought previously to unite his people under the banner of religion, but not that of Christianity. Rather a few years before Vladimir's famous conversion to Christianity, he had made a concerted effort to unify his people under the auspices of paganism. The failure of this effort and the abrupt change of direction as a result of ideological shifts or political expediency marks the first of a handful of such changes of course that charge the fitful history of Russia with its unique character.

Not for lack of effort the scholarly community has been able to elucidate few of the details surrounding the East Slavic brand of paganism and its origin. The Indo-Iranian, Italic, and Hellenic branches of the Indo-European language family display pantheons whose individual actors are not only in close functional correspondence, but also whose nomenclature shows clear etymological correspondence. For example we may clearly identify a Sky god in each tradition, and at the same time we find exacting parallelism in the terminology: the PIE phrase *dyeus pHte:r 'Sky father' has corresponding reflexes in the set phrases of Greek Zeus pate:r, Latin Iu:-(p)piter, and Sanskrit Dyaus pita:. And the reflexes extend further to branches such as Germanic, with gods such as Tiwaz derived from the *o-stem variant *deiuos, and beyond. But when we look to reconstruct the origins of the early Slavic pantheon we find the road laden with pitfalls.

IV.ii.i The Pantheon
We do find clear evidence of an early East Slavic pantheon. The most notable reference to this pantheon comes from the very descriptions of Vladimir's attempt to codify the paganism of his people. The Primary Chronicle mentions that he built a temple on one of the Kievan hills and dedicated it to a collection of pagan deities: Perun (Пєрунъ), Khors (Хърсъ), Dazhbog (Дажьбогъ), Stribog (Стрибогъ), Simargl (Симарьглъ), and Mokosh (Мокошь). Within this temple Vladimir apparently placed idols (кымиры) representing the deities. We even find in the archaeology surrounding Kiev some tentative support for the event: the foundation of a rectangular structure with "six rounded symmetrical projections shaped like flower petals." (Tolochko, 1987) Three of these gods also resurface in the Igor Tale, an epic poem with heroic and pagan overtones. The gods mentioned are Dazhbog, Stribog, and Khors. The references are made in passing, with little explanation. For example, the Eastern Slavs are called the "grandsons of Dazhbog". The Igor Tale also mentions another god, Volos or Veles (Волосъ, Вєлєсъ), who seems to have been an important member of the early pantheon.

The primary sources have little to offer by way of explaining either the origins of this pantheon or the relationships between its members. The following list offers some comments on what can be said for each in turn (cf. Warner, 2002, and Mallory & Adams, 2006).

Perun (Пєрунъ): Perhaps the principal god of the East Slavic pantheon. Encountered as guarantor of the oaths solidifying the peace treaties with Byzantium after Kievan attacks on the imperial center. Likely a war god, as Igor and his men set their weapons before his idol after agreeing to a peace treaty with Byzantium in 945. The cult of Perun was evidently important and observed throughout the lands of the Eastern Slavs: when Vladimir erected his idol in Kiev, Vladimir's uncle simultaneously erected an idol of Perun on the Volkhov river near Novgorod. The name probably derives from PIE *perkunos, yielding Old Norse Fjǫgyn, mother of the thunder god Thor, and also providing Lithuanian thunder god Perku:nas. This might be a formation derived from PIE *per- 'strike'.
Khors (Хърсъ): thought to be a sun-god. He is mentioned as 'great' (вєликъ) in a difficult-to-interpret passage in the Igor Tale.
Dazhbog (Дажьбогъ): also thought to be a sun-god, largely based on a comparison to Greek Helios in the Primary Chronicle. He is also mentioned in the Igor Tale in the phrase Даждьбожа внука 'grandsons of Dazhbog', referring to the Russian people as a whole. We see in the second element the familiar term богъ 'god', likely adopted from early contact with Iranian peoples. Though various sources have been proposed for the first element, it likely derives from the imperative дажь of дати 'to give', leading to an interpretation as the 'giver of wealth'.
Stribog (Стрибогъ): perhaps a god of the winds. This is largely based on the fact that the Igor Tale refers to the winds as Стрибожи внуци 'Stribog's descendants' (literally 'grandchildren'). By the same token, the phrase could be taken as a vocative referring to those listening, the Russians in general. Possibly related to PIE *pHte:r 'father', cf. Lat. Iu:(p)piter, through a shift PIE *pHtr- > *ptr- > *str-, though this etymology is dubious. Alternatively the name as a whole might be a borrowing of a possible Iranian *sri:baga- (cf. Skt. Sri:deva, literally the 'noble god'), with early East Slavic inserting an epenthetic *-t- in the sequence *sr-.
Simargl (Симарьглъ): No convincingly plausible etymologies. Most probably a borrowing, perhaps recalling the Iranian Si:murg, a deity that is part bird, part dog, and part lion or griffin. Some bracelets from Kiev and elsewhere, dating roughly to the 12th and 13th centuries, depict a dog-headed, winged creature that has been interpreted by some as Simargl.
Mokosh (Мокошь): No convincing etymologies. Variously interpreted as a fertility goddess, receiving her name from the root mok- 'moist', or as a female household spirit and patroness of weaving.
Volos or Veles (Волосъ, Вєлєсъ): a god of cattle, and likely of commerce and prosperity in general. Frequently paired with Perun as guarantor of treaties struck between Byzantium and the Kievan Rus. In those treaties in which he is invoked, it is likely for the purpose of securing favorable conditions in commerce. His idol was placed in the merhant quarter of Kiev where ships often moored along the river Pochaina. There was also an idol of Volos placed in the north in Rostov. In the Igor Tale, the great poet Bojan is referred to as as Вєлєсовъ бнукъ 'Veles's descendant' (literally 'grandson'). This has raised speculation that Volos was understood as a patron deity of musicians, completing an apparent functional parallel with the Greek god Apollo.
The common pan-Slavic word for 'god' is богъ. We suppose a PIE ancestral form *bhagos 'apportioner', whose only clearly divine reflex comes from the Indo-Iranian family, where we find Sanskrt bhaga- and Avestan baga-. This latter was likely transferred to the Slavs through their mostly prehistoric interaction on the Eurasian steppe. The term also occurs in Phrygian Bagaios as an epithet of Zeus, but with a clear sense of 'apportioner' and no necessarily divine connotation. Similarly we find in Tocharian B pa:ke 'share, portion' (Mallory & Adams, 2006). Another apparent shared feature between the early Iranians and early Slavs is the shift undergone by the PIE root *deiuos: where across the rest of the Indo-European family its reflexes signify 'god', within Iranian (e.g. Avestan dae:va-) and Slavic (дивъ, also mentioned in the Igor Tale) the sense has shifted to the gods' evil counterpart and takes on the sense of 'demon'.

IV.ii.ii Mythic Traditions
Early sources remain difficult to interpret when it comes to the pre-Christian religious and spiritual practices of the laypeople. For more information on such practices scholars have often had recourse to traditional practices encountered in modern times in rural areas. To be sure the extension of understanding gained from modern practices to the period of the early Rus is fraught with difficulty, and any conclusions to be drawn must be taken as tentative at best. But we nevertheless find some practices whose origins can plausibly be traced backed to Kievan Rus.

The pre-Christian culture early held a reverence for the forces of the natural world. This is illustrated by the associations of the gods of the pantheon mentioned above, several of which recall natural phenomena. We also find in the lexicon an isogloss with Greek: OCS чѹдо 'wonder' and its homophonic relative in Russian derive from the PIE root *keudes- 'magic force' that gives Greek ku:dos 'renown'.

Rural society also preserves a tradition of byliny (былины, singular былина, perhaps from быль '(a) noble, aristocrat'), which are heroic tales often recounting the exploits of the early defenders of Kievan Rus and of the saints of the early Eastern Slavs (Warner, 2002). One of the puzzling facts of this tradition, however, is that, though it often treats exploits of the ancient Slavs, particularly those centered on the kingdom of Kiev, nevertheless this tradition seems absent from modern Kiev.

A possible resolution to this dilemma perhaps lies in the curious travels and travails of the skomorokhi. The skomorokhi (скоморохи, a modern plural; singular скомрахъ or скоромохъ, literally 'vagabond') were musicians, and they may have been responsible for the transplantation of traditional byliny from Kiev in the south to the northern reaches of Russia. Evidence suggests the skomorokhi were already present in pre-Christian Kiev performing at ceremonies and festivals. Some textual sources exist to associate the skomorokhi with the singing of heroic songs. In particular (Zguta, 1972),

The Igor Tale mentions the poet Bojan and says that his fame was such that he sang the praises of Jaroslav the Wise and others;
The singer Mitus is mentioned in the Ipatievskaia letopis' as being taken prisoner by the prince of Galich in 1241.
It appears that, after the conversion of the Rus to Christianity under Vladimir, the clergy singled out the skomorokhi and associated them with pre-Christian traditions that they were trying to eradicate. We find in 1465 a church painting which depicts the Antichrist as a wandering musician or actor (Andreyev, 1962), presumably in part because such performers continued to portray pagan themes and personages.

Originally the skomorokhi coexisted with the gusliari, who were court poets. The former were renowned for flamboyant dress, while the latter wore standard dress of the period. But as persecution continued and opportunities to perform became more scarce, eventually the roles of gusliari and skomorokhi merged into the personage of the minstrel-entertainer. The skomorokhi gradually transformed the originally courtly and elegant byliny to lighter tunes with more entertaining stories to suit the changing tastes of the audience (Zguta, 1972). By the end of the 11th century the clergy had driven the skomorokhi from Kiev and they migrated to the more tolerant atmosphere of Novgorod.

Reading and Textual Analysis
Here begins the entry in the Primary Chronicle for the year 946. Casting aside the cunning with which she has exacted revenge until now, Olga mobilizes her army for a full scale assault against the Derevlians. The Derevlians hole themselves up in their fortress and refuse further combat. To break the stalemate, Olga devises yet another plan. She negotiates so that the Derevlians drop their guard. The following passage lists lines 102-143.

102 - В лѣто ,ѕ. у. н д.
 Collapse All
В -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- In
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- the year
ѕ -- number; <ѕ> six; six thousand -- six thousand
у -- number; <у> four hundred -- four hundred
н -- number; <н> fifty -- fifty
д -- number; <д> four -- four

102-104 - Ѡльга съ сꙑномъ своимъ свꙗтославомъ собра вои много и храбрꙑ и иде на дерьвьску землю.
 Collapse All
Ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- together with
сꙑномъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <сꙑнъ> son -- son
своимъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
свꙗтославомъ -- proper noun; masculine instrumental singular of <Свѧтославъ> Svjatoslav, Svyatoslav, Sviatoslav (name of a prince) -- Svjatoslav
собра -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <събьрати, -бєрѫ, -бєрєши> collect, gather -- gathered
вои -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <вой> fighter; (pl.) troops, army -- an army
много -- adjective; neuter accusative singular of <мъногъ> much, many -- great # For expected masculine accusative plural мъногъӏ
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
храбрꙑ -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <храбръ> (m.) fighter, soldier; (adj.) strong -- fierce
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
иде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- went
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- to
дерьвьску -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- of Dereva
землю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the land

104-106 - изидоша деревлѧне противу. сънемъшемъ сѧ ѡбѣма полкома на скупь суну копьємъ свꙗтославъ на деревлѧнꙑ.
 Collapse All
изидоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <изити, -идѫ, -идєши> go out -- came out
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- The Derevlians
противу -- adverb; <противъ, противѫ> (adv.) opposite; (prep. w. dat.) according to; to meet -- to meet (them)
сънемъшемъ -- past participle; masculine dative plural of <сънѧти, съньмѫ, съньмєши> take away from, remove; go down, descend; lead down; (refl.) come together, collect, gather -- When... had gathered # Dative absolute. Note here the dative plural, though what follows suggests this should be a dual form
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
ѡбѣма -- pronoun; masculine dative dual of <оба, обѣ, обѣ> both -- the two
полкома -- noun; masculine dative dual of <плъкъ> crowd; people, population; cohort, troop -- forces
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- to-
скупь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <съкѹпъ> a joining; a convening, a coming together -- -gether
суну -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <сѹнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> pour out -- lashed out
копьємъ -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <копьѥ> spear, lance; sword -- with a spear
свꙗтославъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Свѧтославъ> Svjatoslav, Svyatoslav, Sviatoslav (name of a prince) -- Svjatoslav
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- against
деревлѧнꙑ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians

106-108 - и копьє летѣ сквозѣ ѹши коневи ѹдари в ноги коневи, бѣ бо дѣтескъ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- But
копьє -- noun; neuter nominative singular of <копьѥ> spear, lance; sword -- the spear
летѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <лєтѣти, -штѫ, -тиши> fly; run -- flew
сквозѣ -- preposition; <сквозѣ, скозѣ> (w. acc.) through -- past
ѹши -- noun; neuter accusative dual of <ѹхо, ѹшєсє> ear -- the ears
коневи -- noun; masculine dative singular of <конь> horse -- of the horse
ѹдари -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹдарити, -рѭ, -риши> strike, beat -- (and) struck
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- against
ноги -- noun; feminine locative singular of <нога> foot -- the... leg # Note the ending, not properly belonging to the a-stem declension. Likely an importation of the locative ending from the i-stem declension, though potentially also an accusative dual imported from the same declension, or even a shift of the accusative plural -ы to -и.
коневи -- noun; masculine dative singular of <конь> horse -- horse's # Given the ending of ноги, this could alternately be interpreted as a feminine locative singular (or accusative dual, etc.) from the adjective конѥвъ 'of a horse, relating to a horse'.
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- he was (still)
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
дѣтескъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <дѣтьскъ> childish -- a boy

108-110 - и рече свѣнелдъ и асмолдъ, кнѧзь ѹже почалъ. потѧгнѣте, дружина, по кнѧзѣ. и побѣдиша деревлѧнꙑ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
свѣнелдъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Свѣньлдъ> Sveinald (Scandinavian name) -- Sveinald
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
асмолдъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Асмудъ> Asmud, Asmund, Asmundr (Scandinavian name) -- Asmund
кнѧзь -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- the prince
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- already
почалъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <почѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin, commence -- has... begun # Note use of the l-participle for the perfect tense, without an accompanying form of быти 'to be'
потѧгнѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <потѧгнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> work, be useful, strive, be strong, be able -- move
дружина -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- guards # Nominative form for expected vocative дружино
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- after
кнѧзѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- the prince
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
побѣдиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <побѣдити, -ждѫ, -диши> conquer; fight, fight against; set in motion, hasten, incite; sally out -- they drove back
деревлѧнꙑ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians

110-112 - деревлѧне же побѣгоша и затвориша сѧ въ градѣхъ своихъ.
 Collapse All
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- The Derevlians
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
побѣгоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <побѣгнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> flee, take flight -- fled
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
затвориша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <затворити, -рѭ, -риши> close, shut -- shut... up
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- themselves
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градѣхъ -- noun; masculine locative plural of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- stronghold
своихъ -- adjective; masculine locative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their

112-115 - ѡльга же ѹстреми сѧ съ сꙑнъмъ своимъ, а деревлѧне затвориша сѧ въ градѣ и борѧху сѧ крѣпко изъ града, вѣдѣху бо ꙗко сами ѹбили кнѧзѧ и на что сѧ предати.
 Collapse All
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
ѹстреми -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹстрьмити сѧ, -млѭ, -миши> hasten, rush; be eager -- set forth
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
сꙑнъмъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <сꙑнъ> son -- son
своимъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
затвориша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <затворити, -рѭ, -риши> close, shut -- holed up
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- (their) stronghold
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
борѧху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <брати, борѭ, борѥши> fight -- fought
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
крѣпко -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <крѣпъкъ> (adj.) healthy, strong, powerful; (adv.) strenuously, vigorously -- strenuously
изъ -- preposition; <из> (w. gen.) from, out of -- from
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- (their) fortress
вѣдѣху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <вѣдѣти, вѣмь, вѣси> see, know -- they knew
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- for
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- that
сами -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <самъ> self, oneself -- they
ѹбили -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- had killed # Note l-participle functioning as pluperfect without accompanying form of быти 'to be'
кнѧзѧ -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- the prince
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- to
что -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- what
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- themselves
предати -- verb; infinitive of <прѣдати, -дамь, -даси> hand over, commend -- (they) would surrender # Infinitive with an accompanying (explicit or implied) form of быти 'to be' often connotes obligation or necessity. Compare English 'It is not for us to question why'.

115-117 - и стоꙗ ѡльга лѣто, не можаше всѧти града. и ѹмꙑслꙇ сице.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
стоꙗ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <стоꙗти, стоѭ, стоиши> stand, stay in place -- stayed
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
лѣто -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лѣто> year, summer -- for a year # Note the use of the accusative to denote extent of time
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- un-
можаше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <мошти, могѫ, можєши> be able, can -- was...-able
всѧти -- verb; infinitive of <възѧти, -зьмѫ, -зьмєши> pick up, take -- to take
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- (their) fortress
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
ѹмꙑслꙇ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹмꙑслити, -шлѭ, -слиши> devise, contrive, invent -- she devised
сице -- pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <сиць, сицє, сица> such, like this -- the following

117-120 - посла ко граду глаголющи, что хочете досѣдѣти, а вси гради ваши предаша сѧ мнѣ. и ꙗли сѧ по дань и дѣлають нивꙑ своꙗ и землѣ своꙗ.
 Collapse All
посла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- She sent
ко -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
граду -- noun; masculine dative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
глаголющи -- participle; feminine nominative singular of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- saying
что -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- why
хочете -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- do you want
досѣдѣти -- verb; infinitive of <досѣдѣти, -ждѫ, -диши> bring about by sitting, achieve through encamping or remaining in the field -- remain besieged
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- while
вси -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
гради -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- (other) towns
ваши -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
предаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прѣдати, -дамь, -даси> hand over, commend -- have surrendered # Note the Old Russian use of the aorist where English permits the perfect
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
ꙗли -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <ѩти, имѫ, имєши> take, seize; (refl.) take to, set out, start on -- They have taken
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- to
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
дѣлають -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <дѣлати, -лаѭ, -лаѥши> work, toil; till; quarry -- they till... (quarry)
нивꙑ -- noun; feminine accusative plural of <н҄ива> field, ground -- fields
своꙗ -- adjective; feminine accusative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
землѣ -- noun; feminine accusative plural of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the land
своꙗ -- adjective; feminine accusative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their

120-121 - а вꙑ хочете изъмерети гладомъ, не имуче сѧ по дань.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- But
вꙑ -- pronoun; nominative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you # Note the use of the subject pronoun for emphasis, in contrast to the preceding statement
хочете -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- wish
изъмерети -- verb; infinitive of <измрѣти, -мрѫ, -мрєши> die -- to die
гладомъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <гладъ> hunger, famine -- of famine # Note Old Russian use of the instrumental: 'die by hunger' rather than English 'die of hunger'
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
имуче -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <ѩти, имѫ, имєши> take, seize; (refl.) take to, set out, start on -- taking
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- yourselves
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- to
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute

121-123 - деревлѧне же рекоша, ради сѧ бꙑхомъ ꙗли по дань, но хощеши мьщатꙇ мужа своєго.
 Collapse All
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рекоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
ради -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <радъ> glad, happy -- gladly # Notice that Old Russian occasionally favors an adjective agreeing with the subject where English would employ an adverb
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
бꙑхомъ -- verb; 1st person plural aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- would... have
ꙗли -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <ѩти, имѫ, имєши> take, seize; (refl.) take to, set out, start on -- taken
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- to
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
хощеши -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- you want
мьщатꙇ -- verb; infinitive of <мьштати, -таѭ, -таѥши> defend against, revenge, avenge -- to avenge
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
своєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- your

123-126 - рече же имъ ѡльга, ꙗко азъ мьстꙇла ѹже ѡбиду мужа своєго когда придоша києву, второє и третьєє когда творихъ трꙑзну мужєви своєму.
 Collapse All
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- ...
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
мьстꙇла -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <мьштати, -таѭ, -таѥши> defend against, revenge, avenge -- avenged
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- already
ѡбиду -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <обида> injustice, outrage, injury -- the injustice
мужа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- against... husband
своєго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- my
когда -- adverb; <когда> when; sometime -- when
придоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- they came
києву -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Кꙑєвъ> Kiev, Kyiv (name of a city) -- to Kiev
второє -- adjective used as substantive; neuter nominative singular of <въторꙑи, -роѥ, -раꙗ> second, following -- the second
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
третьєє -- adjective used as substantive; neuter nominative singular of <трєтьи, -тьѥ, -тьꙗ> third -- third (times)
когда -- adverb; <когда> when; sometime -- when
творихъ -- verb; 1st person singular aorist of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- I performed
трꙑзну -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <тризна, трꙑзна> contest, prize; stadium; trench, track; funeral repast, commemoration of the dead -- the wake
мужєви -- noun; masculine dative singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- for... husband # Note the adoption of the dative ending from the u-stem paradigm
своєму -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- my

126-128 - а ѹже не хощю мъщати, но хощю дань имати по малу. смиривши сѧ с вами поиду ѡпѧть.
 Collapse All
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- Now
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
хощю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- I do... wish
мъщати -- verb; infinitive of <мьштати, -таѭ, -таѥши> defend against, revenge, avenge -- to avenge (him)
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
хощю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- I wish
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
имати -- verb; infinitive of <имати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire -- to receive
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- ...
малу -- adjective; feminine singular accusative of <малъ> small, young -- a small # Feminine accusative agreeing with дань, both to be taken as governed by по. Alternatively we may view малу as a masculine or neuter dative singular, alone governed by по in a collocation по малу 'in a small degree'.
смиривши -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <съмирити, -рѭ, -риши> make peace; come together, unite; reconcile -- After making peace
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
вами -- pronoun; instrumental plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
поиду -- verb; 1st person singular present of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- I will go
ѡпѧть -- adverb; <опѧть> back -- back

128-130 - рекоша же деревлѧне, што хощеши ѹ насъ. ради даємъ медомь и скорою.
 Collapse All
рекоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- responded
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- the Derevlians
што -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- What
хощеши -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- do you want
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- from
насъ -- pronoun; genitive plural of <азъ> I -- us
ради -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <радъ> glad, happy -- happily
даємъ -- verb; 1st person plural present of <даꙗти, даѭ, даѥши> give, provide -- We will... provide (you)
медомь -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <мєдъ, мєдѹ> honey -- with honey
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
скорою -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <скора> bark, shell; pine; skin, hide, pelt, leather -- hide(s)

130-131 - ѡна же рече имъ, нꙑнѣ ѹ васъ нѣсть меду ни скорꙑ. но мало ѹ васъ прошю.
 Collapse All
ѡна -- demonstrative pronoun; feminine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- she
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- replied
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
нꙑнѣ -- adverb; <нꙑн҄ꙗ, нꙑнѣ> now -- now
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- by
васъ -- pronoun; genitive plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
нѣсть -- adverb; <нє> not + verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- There is... neither
меду -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мєдъ, мєдѹ> honey -- honey # Note genitive rather than nominative due to negation
ни -- conjunction; <ни> and not, nor, no; (repeated) neither... nor -- nor
скорꙑ -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <скора> bark, shell; pine; skin, hide, pelt, leather -- hide(s) # Note genitive rather than nominative due to negation
но -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- But
мало -- adjective used as substantive; neuter accusative singular of <малъ> small, young -- little
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- from
васъ -- pronoun; genitive plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
прошю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <просити, -шѫ, -сиши> ask, demand -- I seek

131-134 - даите ми ѿ двора по .г. голуби да .г. воробьи. азъ бо не хощю тѧжьки дани възложити, ꙗко же и мужь мои, сего прошю ѹ васъ мало.
 Collapse All
даите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <даꙗти, даѭ, даѥши> give, provide -- provide
ми -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- me
ѿ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- From
двора -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- house
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- (each)... with
г -- number; <г> three -- three
голуби -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- pigeons
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- and
г -- number; <г> three -- three
воробьи -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <врабий> sparrow -- sparrows
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- For
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
хощю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- I do... wish
тѧжьки -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <тѧжькъ> grave; burdensome; savage; intolerable -- burdensome # Note feminine genitive singular ending -и rather than -ы, expected both based on the type of declension and on the fact that -и would historically have caused palatalization in the final velar. This, together with дани to which it refers, could also be taken as a feminine accusative plural. But on the one hand we would still expect the ending -ы, and on the other hand we expect a genitive form due to negation.
дани -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
възложити -- verb; infinitive of <възложити, -жѫ, -жиши> throw upon, cast upon; impose -- to impose
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
мужь -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <мѫжь> man, husband -- husband
мои -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
сего -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter genitive singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- of this
прошю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <просити, -шѫ, -сиши> ask, demand -- (but) I seek
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- from
васъ -- pronoun; genitive plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
мало -- adjective used as substantive; neuter accusative singular of <малъ> small, young -- a small part # Compare the construction with сего... мала in the following sentence.

134-135 - вꙑ бо єсте изънємогли в осадѣ, да сего ѹ васъ прошю мала.
 Collapse All
вꙑ -- pronoun; nominative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you # Note the use of the subject pronoun for emphasis, in contrast to the preceding statement
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- For
єсте -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- have been
изънємогли -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <изнємошти, -могѫ, -можєши> be unable; be weak; become wearied, be exhausted -- wearied
в -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- by
осадѣ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <осада> siege -- siege
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- so that
сего -- demonstrative adjective; neuter genitive singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
ѹ -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- from
васъ -- pronoun; genitive plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
прошю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <просити, -шѫ, -сиши> ask, demand -- I seek
мала -- adjective used as substantive; neuter genitive singular of <малъ> small, young -- small portion # Note the use of the genitive with просити 'to ask, demand'

136-138 - деревлѧне же ради бꙑвше и собраша ѿ двора по .г. голуби и по .г. воробьи и послаша к ользѣ с поклономъ.
 Collapse All
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- The Derevlians
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
ради -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <радъ> glad, happy -- happy
бꙑвше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- having become
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
собраша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <събьрати, -бєрѫ, -бєрєши> collect, gather -- collected
ѿ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
двора -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- house
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- (each)...
г -- number; <г> three -- three
голуби -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- pigeons
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- (each)...
г -- number; <г> three -- three
воробьи -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <врабий> sparrow -- sparrows
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
послаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
ользѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
с -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
поклономъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <поклонъ> bow; worship; salutation, greeting -- a greeting

138-140 - вольга же рече имъ, се ѹже єсть покорили сѧ мнѣ и моєму дѣтѧти. а идѣте въ градъ и приду въ градось.
 Collapse All
вольга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga # Note the insertion of в- before initial о-.
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- said
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- to them
се -- interjection; <сє> lo, behold -- Indeed
ѹже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- ...
єсть -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- have # For expected єсте
покорили -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <покорити, -рѭ, -риши> place under, submit, subject; be obedient, obey -- submitted
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
моєму -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
дѣтѧти -- noun; neuter dative singular of <дѣтѧ> infant; breast, teat; child -- child
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
идѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- Go
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
градъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
приду -- verb; 1st person singular present of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- I will arrive
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градось -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city + demonstrative adjective; masculine accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- that city # Note the combination of the noun and postposed demonstrative adjective. Since they are pronounced as a phonological unit, the final -ъ of the accusative singular of градъ finds itself in strong position and is vocalized as -о-.

140-143 - и деревлѧне же ради бꙑвше внидоша въ градъ и повѣдаша людємъ, и обрадоваша сѧ людьє въ градѣ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
деревлѧне -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <дрѣвлянинъ> Derevlian, from Dereva -- The Derevlians
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
ради -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <радъ> glad, happy -- happy
бꙑвше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- having become
внидоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <вънити, -идѫ, -идєши> go into, enter -- entered
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- into
градъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
повѣдаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <повѣдѣти, -вѣмь, -вѣси> announce, report, recount -- informed
людємъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- the people # Note the use of the dative with повѣдати 'to report, announce'
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
обрадоваша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <обрадовати, -дѹѭ, -дѹѥши> show grace; rejoice, be merry -- rejoiced
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
людьє -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- the people
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
градѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city

Lesson Text
102 - В лѣто ,ѕ. у. н д. 102-104 - Ѡльга съ сꙑномъ своимъ свꙗтославомъ собра вои много и храбрꙑ и иде на дерьвьску землю. 104-106 - изидоша деревлѧне противу. сънемъшемъ сѧ ѡбѣма полкома на скупь суну копьємъ свꙗтославъ на деревлѧнꙑ. 106-108 - и копьє летѣ сквозѣ ѹши коневи ѹдари в ноги коневи, бѣ бо дѣтескъ. 108-110 - и рече свѣнелдъ и асмолдъ, кнѧзь ѹже почалъ. потѧгнѣте, дружина, по кнѧзѣ. и побѣдиша деревлѧнꙑ. 110-112 - деревлѧне же побѣгоша и затвориша сѧ въ градѣхъ своихъ. 112-115 - ѡльга же ѹстреми сѧ съ сꙑнъмъ своимъ, а деревлѧне затвориша сѧ въ градѣ и борѧху сѧ крѣпко изъ града, вѣдѣху бо ꙗко сами ѹбили кнѧзѧ и на что сѧ предати. 115-117 - и стоꙗ ѡльга лѣто, не можаше всѧти града. и ѹмꙑслꙇ сице. 117-120 - посла ко граду глаголющи, что хочете досѣдѣти, а вси гради ваши предаша сѧ мнѣ. и ꙗли сѧ по дань и дѣлають нивꙑ своꙗ и землѣ своꙗ. 120-121 - а вꙑ хочете изъмерети гладомъ, не имуче сѧ по дань. 121-123 - деревлѧне же рекоша, ради сѧ бꙑхомъ ꙗли по дань, но хощеши мьщатꙇ мужа своєго. 123-126 - рече же имъ ѡльга, ꙗко азъ мьстꙇла ѹже ѡбиду мужа своєго когда придоша києву, второє и третьєє когда творихъ трꙑзну мужєви своєму. 126-128 - а ѹже не хощю мъщати, но хощю дань имати по малу. смиривши сѧ с вами поиду ѡпѧть. 128-130 - рекоша же деревлѧне, што хощеши ѹ насъ. ради даємъ медомь и скорою. 130-131 - ѡна же рече имъ, нꙑнѣ ѹ васъ нѣсть меду ни скорꙑ. но мало ѹ васъ прошю. 131-134 - даите ми ѿ двора по .г. голуби да .г. воробьи. азъ бо не хощю тѧжьки дани възложити, ꙗко же и мужь мои, сего прошю ѹ васъ мало. 134-135 - вꙑ бо єсте изънємогли в осадѣ, да сего ѹ васъ прошю мала. 136-138 - деревлѧне же ради бꙑвше и собраша ѿ двора по .г. голуби и по .г. воробьи и послаша к ользѣ с поклономъ. 138-140 - вольга же рече имъ, се ѹже єсть покорили сѧ мнѣ и моєму дѣтѧти. а идѣте въ градъ и приду въ градось. 140-143 - и деревлѧне же ради бꙑвше внидоша въ градъ и повѣдаша людємъ, и обрадоваша сѧ людьє въ градѣ.
Translation
102 In the year 6454.
102-104 Olga, together with her son Svjatoslav, gathered an army great and fierce and went to the land of Dereva. 104-106 The Derevlians came out to meet them. When the two forces had gathered together, Svjatoslav lashed out with a spear against the Derevlians. 106-108 But the spear flew past the ears of the horse and struck against the horse's leg, for he was (still) a boy. 108-110 And Sveinald and Asmund said, "The prince has already begun, so, guards, move after the prince!" And they drove back the Derevlians. 110-112 The Derevlians fled and shut themselves up in their stronghold. 112-115 Olga set forth with her son, but the Derevlians holed up in their stronghold and fought strenuously from their fortress, for they knew they had killed the prince and to what they would surrender themselves. 115-117 Olga remained for a year, (but) she was unable to take the city. And she devised the following. 117-120 She sent to the city, saying, "Why do you want to remain besieged, while all your other towns have surrendered to me? They have taken to tribute, and they till their fields and quarry their land. 120-121 But you wish to die of famine, not taking yourselves to tribute." 121-123 The Derevlians responded, "We would gladly have undertaken tribute, but you want to avenge your husband." 123-126 Olga said to them, "I already avenged the injustice against my husband when they came to Kiev, the second and third (times) when I performed the wake for my husband. 126-128 Now I do not wish to avenge (him), but rather I wish to receive a small tribute. After making peace with you, I will go back." 128-130 And the Derevlians responded, "What do you want from us? We will happily provide (you) with honey and hide(s)." 130-131 And she replied to them, "There is by you now neither honey nor hide(s). But I seek little from you. 131-134 From (each) house provide me with 3 pigeons and 3 sparrows. For I do not wish to impose a burdensome tribute, as my husband, but I seek a small part of this from you. 134-135 For you have been wearied by siege, so that I seek this small portion from you." 136-138 The Derevlians, having become happy, collected from (each) house 3 pigeons and 3 sparrows and sent to Olga with a greeting. 138-140 And Olga said to them, "Indeed you have submitted to me and my child. Go to the city and I will arrive in that city." 140-143 The Derevlians, having become happy, entered into the city and informed the people, and the people rejoiced in the city.
Grammar
26 The Present Active Participle
The present active participle is a particular verbal adjective which denotes an action that is ongoing at the time of the main verb of the clause in which it occurs. As such the term "present" in the name is a misnomer: better terminology would perhaps be "concurrent active participle". The fact that the participle is active denotes that the noun modified by the participle is the one doing, rather than receiving, the action represented by the underlying verb.

The present active participle of Old Russian parallels the English participle in -ing. Consider for example the sentence Walking into the store yesterday, I saw the man you mentioned. Here walking is a present active participle, modifying the subject I of the main verb saw. The main verb itself is in the past tense, and it is clear from the context that the entire statement speaks about past time. Thus walking cannot refer to any action of the present time, even though it is still called the present active participle. Rather the participle walking represents an action that was still developing, or ongoing, when the action represented by the main verb saw occurred.

The Old Russian present active participle is formed by means of adding one of two similar suffixes to the present tense stem of the verb. We have discussed in Section 4.1 how to obtain this stem. A convenient way of viewing the process in the context of the present active participle is: take the third person plural of the present tense, and remove the ending -- either -уть or -ять. What remains is the present tense stem. To this stem Old Russian adds either of the two suffixes, each of which has two forms, according to the following rules:

Add the stem -уч- or -ущ-, derived from CS *-ǫtj-, to those verbs whose present tense third person plural ending is -уть;
Add the stem -яч- or -ящ-, derived from CS *-ętj-, to those verbs whose present tense third person plural ending is -ять;
Class V verbs form an exception and employ the stem -уч- or -ущ-, even though their present tense third person plural ending is -ять.
To these stems we append endings which for the most part follow the twofold nominal declension.

The nominative singular is special. In Old Church Slavonic we see the preservation of two different options for the common ending of the masculine and neuter nominative singular: -ꙑ and -ѧ. In Old Church Slavonic those verbs whose present tense stem (without the thematic vowel) ends in a hard consonant exhibit the ending -ꙑ for the masculine and neuter nominative singular. Verbs whose stem ends in a palatal glide take the ending -ѧ. In Old Russian, by contrast, we typically find -а where OCS shows -ꙑ. And we generally find -я where OCS shows -ѧ, i.e. in those verbs whose present tense stem ends in a palatal glide. For all verbs, the feminine nominative singular derives from the ending -и added to the present active participle stem.

It is important to note that both -уч- and -ущ- are extremely common in the Old Russian texts. Even though the paradigms that follow will show exclusively the stem -уч-, the reader should not get the impression that -ущ- occurs less frequently. The same applies to the variants -яч- and -ящ-.

26.1 Present Participle Active: Classes I, II, V
The verbs of classes I, II, and V have present tense stems ending in a hard consonant. We therefore expect a masculine and neuter nominative singular in -а. Given that these verbs have third person plural present ending -уть, except for Class V verbs, we expect the suffix -уч- or -ущ-. Consider the following table.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	3rd Pl.	 	Masc. N Sg.	 	Stem
I	 	нєсти	 	carry	 	нєс-уть	 	нєс-а	 	нєс-уч-
II	 	двигнути	 	move	 	двигн-уть	 	двигн-а	 	двигн-уч-
V	 	дати	 	give	 	дадять	 	дад-а	 	дад-уч-
The forms of the verb ити 'to go', with stem ид- (cf. third person plural present ид-уть), serve to illustrate the paradigm of the present active participle.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	ида	 	ида	 	идучи
A	 	идучь	 	идучє	 	идучю
G	 	идучя	 	идучя	 	идучѣ
L	 	идучи	 	идучи	 	идучи
D	 	идучю	 	идучю	 	идучи
I	 	идучємь	 	идучємь	 	идучєю
V	 	ида	 	ида	 	идучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	идучя	 	идучи	 	идучи
A	 	идучя	 	идучи	 	идучи
G	 	идучю	 	идучю	 	идучю
L	 	идучю	 	идучю	 	идучю
D	 	идучєма	 	идучєма	 	идучяма
I	 	идучєма	 	идучєма	 	идучяма
V	 	идучя	 	идучи	 	идучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	идучє	 	идучя	 	идучѣ
A	 	идучѣ	 	идучя	 	идучѣ
G	 	идучь	 	идучь	 	идучь
L	 	идучихъ	 	идучихъ	 	идучяхъ
D	 	идучємъ	 	идучємъ	 	идучямъ
I	 	идучи	 	идучи	 	идучями
V	 	идучє	 	идучя	 	идучѣ
26.2 Present Participle Active: Class III
The verbs of class III have present tense stems ending either in a glide or in a palatal consonant. We therefore expect a masculine and neuter nominative singular in -я. Verbs with stem ending in a palatal consonant, however, often shown the ending -а. Since these verbs also have third person plural present tense in -ють, we find the suffix -юч- or -ющ-, influenced by the stem-final glide. Consider the following table.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	3rd Pl.	 	Masc. N Sg.	 	Stem
III.A	 	знати	 	know	 	зна-ють	 	зна-я	 	зна-юч-
III.B	 	пьсати	 	write	 	пьш-ють	 	пиш-а	 	пиш-юч-
The verb знати 'to know', with stem зна- (phonetically [znaj-]) and third person plural present зна-ють, has present active participle stem знаюч-. The declension is as follows.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	зная	 	зная	 	знаючи
A	 	знаючь	 	знаючє	 	знаючю
G	 	знаючя	 	знаючя	 	знаючѣ
L	 	знаючи	 	знаючи	 	знаючи
D	 	знаючю	 	знаючю	 	знаючи
I	 	знаючємь	 	знаючємь	 	знаючєю
V	 	зная	 	зная	 	знаючи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	знаючя	 	знаючи	 	знаючи
A	 	знаючя	 	знаючи	 	знаючи
G	 	знаючю	 	знаючю	 	знаючю
L	 	знаючю	 	знаючю	 	знаючю
D	 	знаючєма	 	знаючєма	 	знаючяма
I	 	знаючєма	 	знаючєма	 	знаючяма
V	 	знаючя	 	знаючи	 	знаючи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	знаючє	 	знаючя	 	знаючѣ
A	 	знаючѣ	 	знаючя	 	знаючѣ
G	 	знаючь	 	знаючь	 	знаючь
L	 	знаючихъ	 	знаючихъ	 	знаючяхъ
D	 	знаючємъ	 	знаючємъ	 	знаючямъ
I	 	знаючи	 	знаючи	 	знаючями
V	 	знаючє	 	знаючя	 	знаючѣ
26.3 Present Participle Active: Class IV
Finally we have the verbs of class IV. These verbs also have present tense stems ending in a palatal glide. We again expect a masculine and neuter nominative singular in -я. As these verbs have third person plural present tense in -ять, we find the suffix -яч- or -ящ-. Consider the following table.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	3rd Pl.	 	Masc. N Sg.	 	Stem
IV	 	ход-и-ти	 	go	 	ход-ять	 	ход-я	 	ход-яч-
The verb просити 'to ask', with stem прос- and third person plural present прос-ять, has present active participle stem просяч-. The declension is as follows.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	прося	 	прося	 	просячи
A	 	просячь	 	просячє	 	просячю
G	 	просячя	 	просячя	 	просячѣ
L	 	просячи	 	просячи	 	просячи
D	 	просячю	 	просячю	 	просячи
I	 	просячємь	 	просячємь	 	просячєю
V	 	прося	 	прося	 	просячи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	просячя	 	просячи	 	просячи
A	 	просячя	 	просячи	 	просячи
G	 	просячю	 	просячю	 	просячю
L	 	просячю	 	просячю	 	просячю
D	 	просячєма	 	просячєма	 	просячяма
I	 	просячєма	 	просячєма	 	просячяма
V	 	просячя	 	просячи	 	просячи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	просячє	 	просячя	 	просячѣ
A	 	просячѣ	 	просячя	 	просячѣ
G	 	просячь	 	просячь	 	просячь
L	 	просячихъ	 	просячихъ	 	просячяхъ
D	 	просячємъ	 	просячємъ	 	просячямъ
I	 	просячи	 	просячи	 	просячями
V	 	просячє	 	просячя	 	просячѣ
26.4 Present Participle Active: Long Form
The present active participle also appears in a long, or definite, form. This follows the pattern outlined in Section 17, whereby the underlying construction involves appending the corresponding case form of the third person pronoun *и to the participle. In particular the present active participle follows the pattern of the soft long-form adjectives as in Section 17.2. The present active participle of ити 'to go' serves to illustrate the paradigm.

ORuss	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	идаи	 	идучєѥ	 	идучия
A	 	идучьи	 	идучєѥ	 	идучюю
G	 	идучѥго	 	идучѥго	 	идучѥѣ
L	 	идучѥмь	 	идучѥмь	 	идучѥи
D	 	идучѥму	 	идучѥму	 	идучѥи
I	 	идучимь	 	идучимь	 	идучѥю
V	 	идаи	 	идучєѥ	 	идучия
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	идучяя	 	идучии	 	идучии
A	 	идучяя	 	идучии	 	идучии
G	 	идучѥю	 	идучѥю	 	идучѥю
L	 	идучѥю	 	идучѥю	 	идучѥю
D	 	идучима	 	идучима	 	идучима
I	 	идучима	 	идучима	 	идучима
V	 	идучяя	 	идучии	 	идучии
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	идучии	 	идучяя	 	идучѣѣ
A	 	идучѣѣ	 	идучяя	 	идучѣѣ
G	 	идучихъ	 	идучихъ	 	идучихъ
L	 	идучихъ	 	идучихъ	 	идучихъ
D	 	идучимъ	 	идучимъ	 	идучимъ
I	 	идучими	 	идучими	 	идучими
V	 	идучии	 	идучяя	 	идучѣѣ
26.5 Present Participle Active: 'be'
The verb 'be' has stem ѥс- in all forms of the present tense except the third person plural: compare singular first person ѥсмь and second person ѥси to the plural third person суть. Removing the third person plural ending, we are left with с-, to which the present active participle stem is applied according to the rules outlined above: с-ущ-. In the nominative singular masculine, however, we find the form сы 'being', showing the ending common to Old Church Slavonic.

27 The Conditional Construction
Common Slavic apparently inherited the Indo-European optative in certain forms of the verb 'to be'. The Indo-European optative was originally a separate verbal mood used for hypothetical or non-factual situations, like the subjunctive, but generally restricted in its use to clauses expressing some notion related to wish or desire. These forms were retained in Old Church Slavonic in a paradigm called the conditional, and we list them here for purposes of reference.

OCS	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	бимь	 	 	 	бимъ
2	 	би	 	 	 	бистє
3	 	би	 	 	 	бѫ
The dual forms are unattested.

In East Slavic, however, we find no remnants of these specifically conditional forms. Rather they seem to have been replaced by the aorist forms of быти 'to be', listed in the table below.

ORuss	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	быхъ	 	быховѣ	 	быхомъ
2	 	бы	 	быста	 	быстє
3	 	бы	 	быста	 	быша
Thus we see the substitution of an irrealis mood, the optative, by what is properly an indicative mood. We find a parallel in modern English, where colloquial speech commonly replaces the subjunctive If I were you... with the past indicative If I was you....

With these forms Old Russian frequently constructs a hypothetical mood known as the conditional or conditional-optative mood. The periphrastic construction typically involves the l-participle. The most frequent use of the conditional-optative is to mark situations as contrafactual (contrary-to-fact), parallel to English constructions such as If you had only told me... (the construction implying that, in fact, you did not tell me). In addition we find the conditional-optative used in clauses denoting purpose, similar to English I gave him money so that he might buy candy. Moreover we occasionally find the conditional-optative in clauses, even independent clauses, denoting a wish: cf. English Would that you might heed my call... or If only you would heed my call.... Finally, the aorist forms of быти 'to be' may be used alone to lend hypothetical force to a clause. The following list provides some examples of the various uses.

Contrafactual: The conditional-optative may denote events supposed by the speaker not to have happened. For example, ащє бо бꙑ Кꙑи пєрєвозьникъ бꙑлъ, то нє бꙑ ходилъ Цѣсарюграду 'For if Kyi had been a ferryman, then he would not have gone to Constantinople' (Primary Chronicle).
Purpose clause: The conditional-optative in a subordinate clause may denote the purpose of the main or governing clause. For example, да бы Богъ повєлѣлъ и твоя молитва, да быхомъ поставили цьркъвицю малу вънѣ пєчєры 'May God and thy prayer order that we might build a small church outside of the cave' (Primary Chronicle).
Wish: The conditional-optative may be used to mark an independent clause as a wish. The clause is frequently introduced by the conjunction да. For example, да бы Богъ повєлѣлъ и твоя молитва, да быхомъ поставили цьркъвицю малу вънѣ пєчєры 'May God and thy prayer order that we might build a small church outside of the cave' (Primary Chronicle).
Independent: The aorist forms of быти 'to be' may themselves denote a hypothetical situation. For example, Луцє жъ бы потяту быти... 'It would be better to be killed...' (Igor Tale).
28 First Conjugation
Old Russian verbs fall into five basic classes based on their conjugation patterns in the present tense. Here we explain the basic pattern characterizing Class I verbs.

The first conjugation of verbs in Old Russian comprises those verbs which show in the present tense the results of an original PIE *-e/o-, known as the thematic vowel, applied directly to the original verbal root. The thematic vowel *-o- historically appeared in the 1st person of all numbers and in the 3rd person plural; the thematic vowel *-e- appeared before all other endings. However in Slavic it appears that the thematic *-o- of the 1st person dual and plural was early replaced by *-e-. The paradigm of бьрати 'to take, collect' illustrates the evolution. For comparison, the table lists the forms of Greek phero: 'I carry', from the same Indo-European root.

 	 	PIE	 	Early CS	 	Late CS	 	Old Russian	 	Greek
1 Sg.	 	*bher-o-mi	 	*ber-o-m	 	*berǫ	 	бєру	 	phero:
2	 	*bher-e-sei	 	*ber-e-si	 	*bereši	 	бєрєши	 	phereis
3	 	*bher-e-ti	 	*ber-e-tĭ	 	 	 	бєрєть	 	pherei
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	*bher-o-ues	 	*ber-e-ue:	 	*berevě	 	бєрєвѣ	 	-
2	 	*bher-e-tos	 	*ber-e-tas	 	*bereta	 	бєрєта	 	phereton
3	 	*bher-e-tos	 	*ber-e-te	 	*berete	 	бєрєта	 	phereton
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	*bher-o-mon	 	*ber-e-mu	 	*beremŭ	 	бєрємъ	 	pheromen
2	 	*bher-e-te	 	*ber-e-te	 	 	 	бєрєтє	 	pherete
3	 	*bher-o-nti	 	*ber-o-ntĭ	 	*berǫtĭ	 	бєруть	 	(Doric) pheronti
This shows the origin of the overarching pattern in the Old Russian Class I present paradigm: -у and -уть in the 1st person singular and 3rd person plural, and -є- before every other ending in the paradigm. Root-final consonants naturally show the results of palatalization before the front vowel -є-.

Within Old Russian the verbs that belong to Class I fall into two broad categories, typically termed A and B. The distinction is based on whether or not the infinitive shows the suffix -а-:

Class IA: these verbs display a suffix neither in the present stem nor in the infinitive stem. Example: нєсти 'to carry', with stem нєс- appearing both in the infinitive stem (нєс-ти) and in the present stem (нєс-є-ши).
Class IB: these verbs display no suffix in the present stem, but they show the suffix -а- in the infinitive stem. Example: зъвати 'to call', with stem зъв-а- derived from the infinitive and showing the suffix -а-, but which loses the -а- in the present stem зов- (cf. 2nd sg. зов-є-ши).
The chart below provides some examples of Class I verbs of type A and B. Note that the first person singular form shows the stem-final consonant before the palatalizing effects of the thematic vowel *-e-.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	1st Sg.	 	2nd Sg.	 	Pres. Stem	 	Suffixed Stem
IA	 	гнєсти	 	press	 	гнєту	 	гнєтєши	 	гнєт-	 	 
IA	 	вєсти	 	lead	 	вєду	 	вєдєши	 	вєд-	 	 
IA	 	грєти	 	bury	 	грєбу	 	грєбєши	 	грєб-	 	 
IA	 	на-чяти	 	begin	 	начьну	 	начьнєши	 	на-чьн-	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
IB	 	бьрати	 	collect	 	бєру	 	бєрєши	 	бєр-	 	бьр-а-
IB	 	жьдати	 	expect	 	жьду	 	жьдєши	 	жьд-	 	жид-а-
IB	 	тъкати	 	weave	 	тъку	 	тъчєши	 	тък-	 	тък-а-
IB	 	гънати	 	drive out	 	жєну	 	жєнєши	 	жєн-	 	гън-а-
The following table indicates the first conjugation paradigms with the Class IA verbs нєсти 'to carry' (stem нєс-), рєшти or рєчи 'to say' (stem рєк-), въз-яти 'to take' (stem въз-ьм-); and the Class IB verb зъвати (present stem зов-, infinitive stem зъв-а-). Note that only the verb рєщи 'to say' preserves a sigmatic aorist; the remaining verbs show only the new aorist formation. Moreover the -я- of the verb въз-яти 'to take' derives from an original nasalized vowel (cf. OCS въз-ѧти) and this nasal element reappears throughout the paradigm when followed by a vowel.

Class I	 	IA	 	IA	 	IA	 	IB
Stem	 	нєс-	 	рєк-	 	въз-ьм-	 	зов-
Present	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	нєсу	 	рєку	 	въз-ьму	 	зову
2	 	нєсєши	 	рєчєши	 	въз-ьмєши	 	зовєши
3	 	нєсєть	 	рєчєть	 	въз-ьмєть	 	зовєть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсєвѣ	 	рєчєвѣ	 	въз-ьмєвѣ	 	зовєвѣ
2	 	нєсєта	 	рєчєта	 	въз-ьмєта	 	зовєта
3	 	нєсєта	 	рєчєта	 	въз-ьмєта	 	зовєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсємъ	 	рєчємъ	 	въз-ьмємъ	 	зовємъ
2	 	нєсєтє	 	рєчєтє	 	въз-ьмєтє	 	зовєтє
3	 	нєсуть	 	рєкуть	 	въз-ьмуть	 	зовуть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	нєси	 	рьци	 	въз-ьми	 	зови
3	 	нєси	 	рьци	 	въз-ьми	 	зови
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсѣвѣ	 	рьцѣвѣ	 	въз-ьмѣвѣ	 	зовѣвѣ
2	 	нєсѣта	 	рьцѣта	 	въз-ьмѣта	 	зовѣта
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсѣмъ	 	рьцѣмъ	 	въз-ьмѣмъ	 	зовѣмъ
2	 	нєсѣтє	 	рьцѣтє	 	въз-ьмѣтє	 	зовѣтє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	нєса	 	рєка	 	въз-ьма	 	зова
Fem. N	 	нєсучи	 	рєкучи	 	въз-ьмучи	 	зовучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	нєсомъ	 	рєкомъ	 	въз-ьмомъ	 	зовомъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	нєсяахъ	 	рєчаахъ	 	въз-ьмяахъ	 	зъваахъ
2	 	нєсяашє	 	рєчаашє	 	въз-ьмяашє	 	зъваашє
3	 	нєсяашє	 	рєчаашє	 	въз-ьмяашє	 	зъваашє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсяаховѣ	 	рєчааховѣ	 	въз-ьмяаховѣ	 	зъвааховѣ
2	 	нєсяашєта	 	рєчаашєта	 	въз-ьмяашєта	 	зъваашєта
3	 	нєсяашєта	 	рєчаашєта	 	въз-ьмяашєта	 	зъваашєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсяахомъ	 	рєчаахомъ	 	въз-ьмяахомъ	 	зъваахомъ
2	 	нєсяашєтє	 	рєчаашєтє	 	въз-ьмяашєтє	 	зъваашєтє
3	 	нєсяаху	 	рєчааху	 	въз-ьмяаху	 	зъвааху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Sigmatic Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	рѣхъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	-	 	рєчє	 	-	 	-
3	 	-	 	рєчє	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	-	 	рѣховѣ	 	-	 	-
2	 	-	 	рѣста	 	-	 	-
3	 	-	 	рѣста	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	-	 	рѣхомъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	-	 	рѣстє	 	-	 	-
3	 	-	 	рѣша	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	нєсохъ	 	рєкохъ	 	въз-яхъ	 	зъвахъ
2	 	нєсє	 	рєчє	 	въз-я(ть)	 	зъва
3	 	нєсє	 	рєчє	 	въз-я(ть)	 	зъва
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нєсоховѣ	 	рєкоховѣ	 	въз-яховѣ	 	зъваховѣ
2	 	нєсоста	 	рєкоста	 	въз-яста	 	зъваста
3	 	нєсоста	 	рєкоста	 	въз-яста	 	зъваста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нєсохомъ	 	рєкохомъ	 	въз-яхомъ	 	зъвахомъ
2	 	нєсостє	 	рєкостє	 	въз-ястє	 	зъвастє
3	 	нєсоша	 	рєкоша	 	въз-яша	 	зъваша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	нєсъ	 	рєкъ	 	въз-ьмъ	 	зъвавъ
Fem. N	 	нєсъши	 	рєкъши	 	въз-ьмъши	 	зъвавъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	нєслъ	 	рєклъ	 	въз-ялъ	 	зъвалъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	нєсєнъ	 	рєчєнъ	 	въз-ятъ	 	зъванъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	нєсти	 	рєшти/рєчи	 	въз-яти	 	зъвати
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	нєстъ	 	рєштъ	 	въз-ятъ	 	зъватъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	(при)нєсєньѥ	 	(на)рєчєньє	 	въз-ятьѥ	 	зъваньѥ
29 The Accusative Case
In its most basic interpretation the accusative case in Old Russian marks the direct object of a transitive verb. That is, of course, if the verb is not negated or if the direct object is not a male human being, whereby Old Russian generally prefers to mark the direct object with the genitive case. This use of the accusative coincides with its use in other archaic Indo-European languages such as Greek and Latin. The verb need not be in a finite (conjugated) form, but can typically also be in a non-finite form such as the infinitive. The verbal noun may occasionally take the accusative as well. Consider the following examples of the accusative as direct object.

поималъ єси всю дань 'You have taken all the tribute' (Olga's Revenge).
поимємъ жену єго вольгу за кнѧзь свои малъ 'Let us take his wife, Olga, for our prince Mal' (Olga's Revenge).
деревлене ѹбиша игорѧ и дружину єго 'The Derevlians killed Igor and his retinue' (Olga's Revenge). Note here that both игорѧ 'Igor' and дружину 'retinue' are direct objects of the verb ѹбиша 'killed', but игорѧ shows the genitive rather than accusative case. This typically occurs only when the direct object is a male human being.
орли клектомъ на кости звѣри зовутъ 'The eagles with their cry summon the animals to the bones' (Igor Tale). The example illustrates how nouns representing animals, as opposed to humans, generally do not take the genitive when functioning as direct objects. But this rule is not strict within Old Russian (cf. the discussion of the genitive, Section 34).
The Old Russian usage of the accusative case, and of other cases in general, does not necessarily coincide with the use of the accusative in modern Russian. For instance some verbs in Old Russian take a direct object in the accusative where the modern Russian equivalent would require a preposition. Consider the examples below.

слышавъ ярославъ влъхвы, приде суждалю 'Jaroslav, having heard (about) the musicians, came to Suzdal' (Primary Chronicle). In Old Russian слышати by itself meant 'to hear (about)', its meaning in essence "including" the preposition which both English and modern Russian must make explicit with the phrases hear about and слышать о, respectively.
поютъ врємя бусово 'They sing (about) the time(s) of Bus' (Igor Tale). Here again the basic verb "includes" the preposition: пѣти 'to sing (about)', so that the theme sung appears in the accusative. Compare modern Russian петь о 'to sing about'.
The accusative nevertheless appears also in statements which include no transitive verb, or in clauses where the accusative case does not mark the direct object. Heuristically speaking, such uses of the accusative generally serve to denote some sort of direction or extent in space or time, or the goal or endpoint of motion in a particular direction. The following samples provide examples of the accusative marking the goal of directed motion.

поиде ко тьсту своєму Киевъ 'he went to Kiev to his father-in-law' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
и приде Холмъ 'and came to Kholm' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
The examples below, by constrast, show instances in which the phrase in the accusative denotes the duration in time over which an event takes place. The accusative may similarly express the extent in space. Consider the following examples of the accusative of extent of time or space.

бишася дєнь, бишася другыи, трєтьяго дни къ полудню падоша стязи игорєвы 'They fought one day, they fought a second; on the third day toward midday Igor's standards fell' (Igor Tale).
осень умре половечьскыи князь 'During the autumn the Polovtsian prince died' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
и стоꙗ ѡльга лѣто не можаше всѧти града 'And Olga stayed for a year, (but) was unable to take the city' (Olga's Revenge).
30 Participles
Old Russian is enamored of participles. Participles find far greater use in Old Russian than in English. Broadly speaking, Old Russian participles come in two basic flavors: present and past participles. Present participles typically denote an action which is ongoing at the time of the main verb of the clause. Past participles typically denote an action already started by, and usually completed before, the time of the main verb of the clause. In this sense the terms present and past are misnomers when applied to participles: a present participle used in conjuction with a past tense verb, say, will denote an action also in the past; the present participle merely says the action is contemporaneous with the main verb, so that if the finite verb is in the past, associated present participles will also refer to past actions. The terms present and past, as applied to participles, simply denote the relative state of completion of the action with respect to the main verb. The following excerpts provide some examples of the distinction of relative states of completion.

и посъла къ дрєвляномъ, рєкущи сице... 'And she sent for the Derevlians, speaking thus...' (Olga's Revenge). Here the present participle рєкущи accompanies a past-tense verb (посъла) and so itself refers to a past action, though one that happened to be ongoing when the action represented by the finite verb took place.
они же, то слышавъше, съвєзоша меды мъногы зѣло 'And they, having heard this, gathered very great (quantities of) honey' (Olga's Revenge). Here the past participle слышавъше shows that the action was started, and completed, before the action represented by the main verb съвєзоша.
One motivation for the frequent use of participles found in Old Russian, especially in the narrative texts which are so abundant in the corpus, is that they provide a simple way of relating a sequence of actions without being redundant. For example in a narrative text dealing with events occurring in the past, we might run accross numerous uses of the imperfect tense. But after the first use of the imperfect tense, the time frame becomes clear: we are talking about the past. What then becomes important, supposing for the sake of argument that the subject does not change between actions, is not the marking of past time, which is what finite verb conjugation achieves, but rather the relative ordering of events. An imperfect accompanied, say, by a past participle then makes clear that the action denoted by the past participle preceded the action represented by the imperfect; but the speaker or writer need not redundantly employ imperfect morphology to place the events. In fact, simply using two imperfects would be ambiguous: each imperfect would mark the fact that each action occurred before the composition of the sentence (i.e. before the present), but they would not, by themselves, say which of the two actions came first. One would need additional adverbs to place the imperfects in time relative to one another. By contrast the combination of an imperfect with another past participle immediately solves the problem.

Many instances of participle use in Old Russian occur where in English one might expect a full clause with a conjugated verb. Consider the following example of a participle in place of a finite clause: идеже криво, братиѥ, исправивъше чьтѣте 'wherever (it is) wrong, brothers, having corrected (it), read (on)' (Sbornik Svjatoslava Jaroslaviča). This instead of 'wherever it is wrong, brothers, correct it and read on', which would amount to two parallel imperatives.

Often Old Russian uses the participle to stand for a relative clause. Consider the following examples.

и на пути томь стояху мужи чьрни велици въоружени, копия дьржаще в руку и стрѣжаху путь тъ, не дадуще никому же миновати 'and beside that road were standing black, huge, armed men, brandishing spears in (their) hands, and they were guarding that road, not permitting anyone to pass' (Žitije Nifonta, 1219). Typical English phrasing might render this '... men, who were brandishing spears... and did not permit...'.
жєняися пѹщеницею 'whosoever marries the divorced woman...' (Ostromir Gospel, Matthew 5.32, cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 1, p. 858). Here the participle жєняися 'the one marrying' corresponds to Greek use of the relative pronoun hos with a finite verb: hos ean apolelumene:n game:se:i 'he who would marry a divorced woman'.
Occasionally in Old Russian the participle forms the only verbal element in a clause. In such instances we take the participle as complete predicate. The following excerpts provide examples.

слышавьше же древляне яко опять идеть сдумавъше со кънязем своим малом 'The Derevlians heard that he came back (and) they sought counsel with their prince Mal' (Death of Igor).
кънязь нашь убиєнъ 'our prince (has been) killed' (Olga's Revenge).
As Old Russian employs participles where English might employ a full clause, the participles often take on connotations appropriate to different types of subordinate clauses in English. In particular participles may have causal force (as in English 'because...'), concessive (English 'although...'), temporal (English 'when...' or 'after...'), or conditional (English 'if...'). For example, the following excerpts show participles displaying a causal force.

а нынѣ водя новую жену, а мнѣ не въдасть ничитожє 'Now that (since) (he's) taking a new wife, he will give me nothing' (Novgorodskie berestjanye gramoty, cf. Vlasto, 1986, p.203).
ини же, не съвѣдѹще, рѣша яко Кыи есть перевозьникъ былъ 'And they said, not knowing, that Kyi had been a ferryman' (Primary Chronicle). Rendered with a finite clause: 'And, because they did not know, they said that Kyi had been a ferryman'.
By contrast, the following example shows a participle with temporal force: измывъшеся, придѣте къ мънѣ 'Having washed yourselves, come to me' (Olga's Revenge). Rendered by a finite clause: 'After you have washed yourselves, come to me'.

At times certain participles appear to have lost most of their verbal force and seem to function simply as adjectives. Such participles are typically passive. When built from the present passive participle, they frequently denote the possibility of the verbal action. When built from past passive participles, they usually denote the result of the verbal action and lose the verbal force altogether. Consider the following participles which function as simple adjectives:

видимъ 'visible';
нєразоримъ 'indestructible';
съмѣрєнъ 'humble'.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 7
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
IV.iii Burial Practices
The ritual practices surrounding death often provide the observer with a window into a culture. But as with much else in the study of the early Eastern Slavs, the actual data is difficult to interpret. Along the rivers in the area surrounding Lake Ladoga, we find numerous graves in the form of burial mounds. This form of burial is typical of Scandinavian grave sites, and many of these mounds contain jewelry typical of Scandinavian culture, in particular oval brooches. But these, along with the numerous other personal artifacts found in the graves, need not signal that the grave pertained to a Scandinavian, but perhaps just an inhabitant of the region benefitting from the numerous trade routes along which Scandinavian wares made their way. Moreover, these burial mounds exhibit a feature quite uncharacteristic of Scandinavian burials: the central focus of the grave consists of a hearth with cooking utensils (Almgren et al., 1975).

In Gnezdovo, where the Dvina and Dnieper rivers make their closest approach, we find some 3,000 burial mounds. Some of these are non-descript, containing swords which were commonly available along the trade routes through the region. But some are of distinctly Scandinavian origin: they contain the remains of burnt ships, a practice indicative of the Norse culture of the period.

The practice of the ship burial is in part what makes untangling the relationship between Scandinavian, Rus, and Slav so difficult. In particular, the Baghdad diplomat Ibn Fadlan describes in great detail a ship burial performed near Itil, at the mouth of the Volga. But he ascribes the practice to the people he terms the Ru:s (Montgomery, 2000):

 	 	He ignited the wood that had been set up under the ship after they had placed the slave-girl whom they had killed beside her master. Then the people came forward with sticks and firewood. Each one carried a stick the end of which he had set fire to and which he threw on top of the wood. The wood caught fire, and then the ship, the pavilion, the man, the slave-girl and all it contained. A dreadful wind arose and the flames leapt higher and blazed fiercely.
 	 	...
 	 	They built something like a round hillock over the ship, which they had pulled out of the water, and placed in the middle of it a large piece of birch (khadank) on which they wrote the name of the man and the name of the King of the Ru:s. Then they left.
The practice as described clearly derives from Scandinavian burial rituals. This leads one to suspect that at this date the term Rus still signified a foreign-born gentry that had come to live in and among the Eastern Slavs. This of course holds only if we suppose that what Ibn Fadlan means by Ru:s is the same as what the Primary Chronicle, say, means by Rus -- by no means a solid assumption.

Part of the interest in the ship burials practiced among the Scandinavians in the region, from a literary point of view, is how the ritual figures prominantly in the Primary Chronicle's story of Olga's Revenge. In particular, after killing her husband Igor, the inhabitants of Dereva send envoys to Olga to ask her to marry their prince Mal. Though the premise itself seems odd, Olga's ensuing actions betray her cunning: she tricks the envoys into forgoing transport by horse or cart and instead opting to demand that they be carried into town in a boat. Olga has the boat thrown into a pit and orders her people to bury them alive. The story resounds with the overtones of Scandinavian ship burials, to such a degree that it's hard to imagine how the Derevlian envoys could not have seen what was coming as they were transported overland in a boat.

IV.iv Christianity in Rus & Dual Faith
The particular circumstances in which Christianity entered the early Russian state and led to its adoption had a profound impact on the character, symbolism, and practice of the religion throughout the rest of its history. The early literary monuments make it clear that Christianity had already gained popularity among some of the Varangians before Vladimir's conversion. This is evidenced by the example of Olga, as well as other Varangians who had come back from their visits to Byzantium as converts to the new religion. At the same time the pagan religion was still popular before the conversion, as shown in dramatic form by Svjatoslav's rejection of his mother's new religion, based on the fact that he would be the laughing-stock of the bojars whose support he required for his political ambitions.

A notable story from this era is that of the Varangian Feodor and his son Ioann. Feodor had returned from his travels to Byzantium as a Christian convert. But this fell precisely during the time when Vladimir decided to institute paganism as the official state religion. The lot fell to Ioann to function as sacrifical victim to sanctify the institution of the new pagan idols. His father Feodor, however, refused to let his son die as part of a pagan ritual. An incensed mob sought out the father and son and killed them both.

As a result of these literary accounts, as well as archaeological and other evidence, scholars generally believe that Christianity took another two centuries to take hold after Vladimir's official acceptance of the religion. In the transitional period, the two competing systems seem to have existed side by side. This led to a situation termed dvoverie or dvoeverie (двовѣриѥ or двоѥвѣриѥ): "ditheism" or "dual faith". By this term scholars denote the persistence of two different systems of belief alongside one another (Andreyev, 1962). Just what constitutes this dual faith remains a matter of some debate: some assert that the system of dual faith belies a concerted effort among the rural population to maintain the "old ways" of paganism while putting on the airs of Christian faith; others simply suggest by "dual faith" that the earlier pagan beliefs did not die out completely, but rather they persisted in a way that showed that adaptation of earlier ritual and supernatural understanding provided a manner of incorporating the new Christian teachings into the lives of members of a more rural segment of the population.

In fact many rural practices of the recent past, and even extending into modern times, display hallmarks of a mixing of religions, rather than a replacement of one by the other. Traditional remedies and symbolism were never completely abandoned, as exhibited by the fact that "[m]agic roots, snake skins and skulls were worn in charms next to the Christian cross. Forest and water demons lived on in the popular imagination alongside angels and cherubim" (Warner, 2002). Though the byliny took up the themes of the saints' lives, they never completely abandoned the heroic personages of the pre-Chrisitan era.

Some scholars suggest that, in fact, the unique characteristics of the earlier pagan religion played an important role in how certain stories of early Russian Christianity captured the cultural imagination while others did not. One such story is that of Boris and Gleb, the first Russian saints, who "died not for the sake of Christ but in the name of obedience to their elder brother, laying the foundations, as it were, for the essentially Russian idea of nonresistance to evil." (Andreyev, 1962)

Briefly, Boris and Gleb were sons of Vladimir, the same Vladimir who converted the Kievan state to Christianity. When Vladimir died, his eldest son Svjatopolk, one of the brothers of Boris and Gleb, assumed the throne. Worried that his brothers might seek to depose him, he plotted their demise. Though Boris's advisors urged him to take the throne for himself, he determined that he would not raise a hand against his brother. Unmoved by this promise, Svjatopolk nevertheless sent a group of bojars to put Boris to death.

Through similar treachery Gleb met his demise. Leading Gleb to think Vladimir was gravely ill but still alive, Svjatopolk summoned him to their father's deathbed. Though warned of the impending plot by their brother Jaroslav, Gleb nevertheless succumbs to the treachery and his body is cast into the woods.

To the Scandinavian ear of the Rus nobles, reared upon tales of Norse gods, this story would have likely contained some familiar overtones. In particular, the Havamal tells of Odin's self-sacrifice hanging himself from the World Tree. In emulation of this, a Scandinavian cult arose whereby in cases of dire need, the self-sacrifice of none other than the king could find favor with the gods and alleviate the distress. For example, in search of fair winds for his retinue King Vikar sacrifices himself (Reisman, 1978).

In hearing the story of Boris and Gleb, the bojar would likely have associated on some level their story with the functions of the Odin cult. On the one hand, we have the parallel of self-sacrifice among the trees: Odin hanged himself from the World Tree, while Gleb's corpse was cast "between two tree-trunks" (Reisman, 1978). Moreover they were princes (Scandinavian kings) who sacrificed themselves for the good of the kingdom.

It would certainly be a stretch to suggest that the tale of Boris and Gleb grew out of Scandinavian tradition or was directly influenced by it. But the parallelism of the story with an important aspect of Scandinavian religious and political tradition may go some way to explaining why the particular story of Boris and Gleb captured the Kievan cultural attention (Reisman, 1978). We notice that there were earlier Scandinavian-born Rus who died martyrs for the new Christian religion: the story of Feodor and Ioann provides just such an example. Yet those men never attained sainthood. Perhaps one crucial ingredient of the story of Boris and Gleb was their royal status: to the Varangian, only the self-sacrificial actions of a king could serve the greater good of the populace. Boris and Gleb came from the family of kings, and their self-sacrifice showed elements of the Odin cult familiar to the Scandinavians (Reisman, 1978). In this way we can see how the peculiar nature of Russian Christianity, while not dictated by any Scandinavian heritage, may have been helped to take its unique form precisely through the interaction of Scandinavian and East Slavic culture.

Reading and Textual Analysis
We finally arrive at the culmination of the story of Olga's Revenge. Again she resorts to cunning rather than force. She lays waste to the Derevlian home and imposes harsh conditions of servitude. The passage lists lines 143-164.

143-147 - волга же раздаꙗ воємъ по голуби комуждо, а другимъ по воробьєви, и повелѣ комуждо голуби и къ воробьєви привѧзꙑвати цѣрь, ѡбертꙑвающе въ платки малꙑ, нитъкою поверзꙑвающе къ коємуждо ихъ.
 Collapse All
волга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
раздаꙗ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <раздаꙗти, -даѭ, -даѥши> distribute, give out -- distributed
воємъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <вой> fighter; (pl.) troops, army -- to (her) army
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- ...
голуби -- noun; masculine dative singular of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- a pigeon
комуждо -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <къждо> every, everyone -- each
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- and
другимъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <дрѹгъ> other -- to the others
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- (each) # The preposition по frequently has a distributive meaning
воробьєви -- noun; masculine dative singular of <врабий> sparrow -- a sparrow
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- commanded (them)
комуждо -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <къждо> every, everyone -- to each
голуби -- noun; masculine dative singular of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- pigeon
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
воробьєви -- noun; masculine dative singular of <врабий> sparrow -- (each) sparrow
привѧзꙑвати -- verb; infinitive of <привѧзꙑвати, -зѹѭ, -зѹѥши> fasten, bind -- to fasten
цѣрь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <цѣрь> sulfur -- sulfur
ѡбертꙑвающе -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <обврътꙑвати, -ваѭ, -ваѥши> wrap, tuck; wind, twist -- wrapping (it)
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
платки -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <платъкъ> cloth, garment -- cloths
малꙑ -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <малъ> small, young -- small
нитъкою -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <нитъка> thread -- with a thread
поверзꙑвающе -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <повьрзꙑвати, -ваѭ, -ваѥши> tie, bind; fasten, attach -- tying (it)
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
коємуждо -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <къждо> every, everyone -- to each
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- of them

147-149 - и повелѣ ѡльга, ꙗко смерче сѧ, пустити голуби и воробьи воємъ своимъ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- commanded
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
смерче -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <съмръкнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> grow dark, darken -- it grew dark
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
пустити -- verb; infinitive of <пѹстити, -штѫ, -стиши> allow, let, free; send (away) -- to release
голуби -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- the pigeons
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
воробьи -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <врабий> sparrow -- sparrows
воємъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <вой> fighter; (pl.) troops, army -- army
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her

149-153 - голуби же и воробьєве полетѣша въ гнѣзда своꙗ, ѡви въ голубники, врабьѣве жи подъ стрѣхи. и тако възгараху сѧ голубьници, ѡво клѣти, ѡво вежѣ, ѡво ли ѡдринꙑ.
 Collapse All
голуби -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <голѫбь> dove, pigeon -- The pigeons
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
воробьєве -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <врабий> sparrow -- sparrows # Notice the intrusion of the u-declension
полетѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <полєтѣти, -штѫ, -тиши> fly -- flew
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
гнѣзда -- noun; neuter accusative plural of <гнѣздо> couch, bed; nest -- nests
своꙗ -- adjective; neuter accusative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- their
ѡви -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- the former
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- to
голубники -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <голѫбникъ> dovecote, pigeon loft -- (their) cotes # Note the final -и for expected -ы; the -и should historically cause palatalization in the preceding velar.
врабьѣве -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <врабий> sparrow -- the sparrows
жи -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
подъ -- preposition; <подъ> (w. acc.) under, below (object of motion); (w. instr.) under, below (location) -- under
стрѣхи -- noun; feminine accusative plural of <стрѣха> roof; projecting part of a wall, cornice, eaves -- the eaves
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
тако -- adverb; <тако> thus, in this way -- then
възгараху -- noun; 3rd person plural imperfect of <възгарати, -раѭ, -раѥши> burn; boil over -- began to burn
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
голубьници -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <голѫбникъ> dovecote, pigeon loft -- the cotes # Compare with the previous occurrence of this word: here we find the expected -и, accompanied by the results of second palatalization
ѡво -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- then # Note the sequence of correlative adverbs: оно... оно... оно 'first... second... third' or 'then... next... next'
клѣти -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <клѣть> house; household; basement, cellar; shed -- the sheds
ѡво -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- next
вежѣ -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <вѣжа> cellar for storage; kitchen; tent -- the barns
ѡво -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- and finally
ли -- conjunction; <ли> or; whether -- ...
ѡдринꙑ -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <одрина> loft; stable -- the hay-lofts

153-154 - и не бѣ двора идеже не горѧще, и не бѣ льзѣ гасити. вси бо двори възгорѣша сѧ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- no
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
двора -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- house
идеже -- adverb; <идє> where; since; however + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- where
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
горѧще -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <горѣти, -рѭ, -риши> burn; (refl.) produce smoke, be black with smoke -- it was... burning
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- no
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- there was
льзѣ -- adverb; <льзѣ> permitted, allowable; (w. 'to be') be possible -- way
гасити -- verb; infinitive of <гасити, -шѫ, -сиши> extinguish, put out -- to put (it) out
вси -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- All
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- ...
двори -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <дворъ> court, courtyard; home, household -- the houses
възгорѣша -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <възгорѣти, -рѭ, -риши> burn, burn up -- were consumed
сѧ -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...

154-156 - и побѣгоша людьє изъ града. и повелѣ ѡльга воємъ своимъ имати є, ꙗко взѧ градъ и пожьже и.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
побѣгоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <побѣгнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> flee, take flight -- fled
людьє -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- (all) the people
изъ -- preposition; <из> (w. gen.) from, out of -- from
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
повелѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- commanded
ѡльга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
воємъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <вой> fighter; (pl.) troops, army -- army
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
имати -- verb; infinitive of <имати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire -- to capture
є -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them # Note є where we expect я, OCS ѩ
ꙗко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
взѧ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <възѧти, -зьмѫ, -зьмєши> pick up, take -- she took
градъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- the city
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
пожьже -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <пожєшти, -гѫ, -жєши> set on fire, kindle, ignite -- set... ablaze
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- it # Note that the masculine accusative singular of the pronoun *и 'he' is и, not to be confused with the conjunction и.

157-159 - старѣишинꙑ же града изънима, и прочаꙗ люди ѡвꙑхъ изби. а другиꙗ работѣ предасть мужемъ своимъ. а прокъ ихъ стави платити дань.
 Collapse All
старѣишинꙑ -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <старѣйшинъ> leader; prince -- the leaders
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
града -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- of the city
изънима -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <изимати, ѥмлѭ, ѥмлѥши> take, take up; acquire; capture -- she captured
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
прочаꙗ -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <прочьи, -чьѥ, -чьꙗ> the rest, next, remaining -- the remaining
люди -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <людьѥ> (pl.) men, people; population, (a) people -- people
ѡвꙑхъ -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <овъ, ово, ова> this, this one; (repeated) the one... the other -- among them
изби -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <избити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- she killed
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
другиꙗ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative plural of <дрѹгъ> other -- Others
работѣ -- noun; feminine dative singular of <работа> ministry; servitude -- in servitude # Either locative 'in servitude' or dative 'for (the purpose of) servitude'.
предасть -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <прѣдати, -дамь, -даси> hand over, commend -- she handed over # Note the third person singular suffix -ть, preceded by the -с- resulting from a change of the stem-final -д- before -т-: *prě-dad-tĭ
мужемъ -- noun; masculine dative plural of <мѫжь> man, husband -- to... men
своимъ -- adjective; masculine dative plural of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
прокъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative singular of <прокъ> remaining, left over; (subst.) the remnants, the rest -- the rest
ихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- of them
стави -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ставити, -влѭ, -виши> set, establish -- she demanded
платити -- verb; infinitive of <платити, -штѫ, -тиши> loose, free, set free, pay -- to pay
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute

159-162 - и възложиша на нѧ дань тѧжьку, .в. части дани идета києву, а трєтьꙗꙗ вышегоруду к ользѣ. бѣ бо вꙑшегородъ градъ вользинъ.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
възложиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <възложити, -жѫ, -жиши> throw upon, cast upon; impose -- they imposed
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- upon
нѧ -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
дань -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дань> tribute -- tribute
тѧжьку -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <тѧжькъ> grave; burdensome; savage; intolerable -- intolerable
в -- number; <в> two -- two
части -- noun; feminine nominative dual of <чѧсть> part -- parts
дани -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <дань> tribute -- of the tribute
идета -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- went # Note this is a root aorist dual form, from ити 'to go'. Cf. comments by Kiparsky (1967, Vol. 2, p. 223).
києву -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Кꙑєвъ> Kiev, Kyiv (name of a city) -- to Kiev
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
трєтьꙗꙗ -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <трєтьи, -тьѥ, -тьꙗ> third -- the third
вышегоруду -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Вꙑшєградъ> citadel, castle; (as proper name) Vyshegrad, Vyshgorod (name of a city) -- to Vyshgorod
к -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
ользѣ -- proper noun; feminine dative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga
бѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- was
бо -- conjunction; <бо> for -- For
вꙑшегородъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Вꙑшєградъ> citadel, castle; (as proper name) Vyshegrad, Vyshgorod (name of a city) -- Vyshgorod
градъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <градъ> walled structure, walled fortification; garden, enclosed park; home, dwelling, household; city -- city
вользинъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <ользинъ> of Olga, related to Olga -- Olga's

162-164 - и иде вольга по дерьвьстѣи зємли съ сꙑномъ своимъ и съ дружиною ѹставлѧющи ѹставꙑ и ѹроки.
 Collapse All
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
иде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ити, идѫ, идєши> go -- went
вольга -- proper noun; feminine nominative singular of <Ольга> Olga, Helga (Scandinavian name) -- Olga # Note the insertion of в- before initial о-.
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- throughout
дерьвьстѣи -- adjective; feminine dative singular of <дрѣвьскъ> of Dereva, related to Dereva, Derevlian -- of Dereva
зємли -- noun; feminine dative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the land
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
сꙑномъ -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <сꙑнъ> son -- son
своимъ -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- her
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
дружиною -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- (her) retinue
ѹставлѧющи -- participle; feminine nominative singular of <ѹставлꙗти, -ꙗѭ, -ꙗѥши> set, fix; put, place, prescribe, define; discern -- establishing
ѹставꙑ -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <ѹставъ> end; boundary; rule; definition -- boundaries
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
ѹроки -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <ѹрокъ> judgement; festival; expense, charge, cost; supply; payment; stipend -- dues # Note masculine accusative plural in -и where -ы would be expected. Historically the -и would have been accompanied by palatalization.

Lesson Text
143-147 - волга же раздаꙗ воємъ по голуби комуждо, а другимъ по воробьєви, и повелѣ комуждо голуби и къ воробьєви привѧзꙑвати цѣрь, ѡбертꙑвающе въ платки малꙑ, нитъкою поверзꙑвающе къ коємуждо ихъ. 147-149 - и повелѣ ѡльга, ꙗко смерче сѧ, пустити голуби и воробьи воємъ своимъ. 149-153 - голуби же и воробьєве полетѣша въ гнѣзда своꙗ, ѡви въ голубники, врабьѣве жи подъ стрѣхи. и тако възгараху сѧ голубьници, ѡво клѣти, ѡво вежѣ, ѡво ли ѡдринꙑ. 153-154 - и не бѣ двора идеже не горѧще, и не бѣ льзѣ гасити. вси бо двори възгорѣша сѧ. 154-156 - и побѣгоша людьє изъ града. и повелѣ ѡльга воємъ своимъ имати є, ꙗко взѧ градъ и пожьже и. 157-159 - старѣишинꙑ же града изънима, и прочаꙗ люди ѡвꙑхъ изби. а другиꙗ работѣ предасть мужемъ своимъ. а прокъ ихъ стави платити дань. 159-162 - и възложиша на нѧ дань тѧжьку, .в. части дани идета києву, а трєтьꙗꙗ вышегоруду к ользѣ. бѣ бо вꙑшегородъ градъ вользинъ. 162-164 - и иде вольга по дерьвьстѣи зємли съ сꙑномъ своимъ и съ дружиною ѹставлѧющи ѹставꙑ и ѹроки.
Translation
143-147 Olga distributed a pigeon each to her soldiers, and to the others a sparrow each. And she commanded them to fasten sulfur to each pigeon and to each sparrow, wrapping it in a small cloths, tying it with a thread to each of them. 147-149 And as it grew dark, Olga commanded her army to release the pigeons and sparrows. 149-153 The pigeons and sparrows flew to their nests, the former to their cotes, the sparrows under the eaves. And then the cotes began to burn, then the sheds, next the barns, and finally the hay-lofts. 153-154 There was no house where it was not burning, and there was no way to put it out. All the houses were consumed. 154-156 And all the people fled from the city. Olga commanded her soldiers to capture them, as she took the city and set it ablaze. 157-159 She captured the leaders of the city, the remaining people among them she killed. Others she handed over to her men in servitude. The rest of them she demanded to pay tribute. 159-162 And they imposed upon them an intolerable tribute: two parts of the tribute went to Kiev, but the third to Vyshgorod for Olga. For Vyshgorod was Olga's city. 162-164 And she went throughout the land of Dereva with her son and her retinue, establishing boundaries and dues.
Grammar
31 Past Participles
Old Russian has numerous past participle formations. We have already encountered one of these in Section 18 with the resultative, or l-participle. In this section we introduce the remaining types of past participle.

31.1 Past Participle Active
The resultative participle which we saw in Section 18 is in fact a specific type of past active participle. Its use, however, is generally restricted to the construction of compound or periphrastic verbal tenses. Because of this somewhat auxiliary role, some authors term this the past active participle 2.

Old Russian, like Old Church Slavonic, also possesses another past active participle. Because of its ubiquity it is sometimes referred to as the past active participle, or as the past active participle 1. This particular participle has its origins in the Proto-Indo-European perfect participle. This participle employed a suffix *-ues-, which in o-grade was *-uos- and *-us- in zero-grade. The Proto-Slavic past active participle seems to derive from the zero-grade suffix. In the masculine nominative singular the final *-s fell off, while in the remaining case forms it shifted to *-ŭš- via retraction of the sibilant (cf. Section 6.5) and the weakening of PIE *u. After stems ending in a vowel, the suffix developed an on-glide: *-vŭš-. The feminine nominative singular appends the ending -и to the suffix: -(в)ъши.

Old Russian typically appended the -(в)ъш- suffix to the infinitive-aorist stem of verbs (cf. Section 4.2). As mentioned above, the bilabial glide -в- appears with stems ending in a vowel. With verbs of class IV, the final palatal glide -j- generally fronts the jer of the suffix, resulting in -ьш-. For example the class IV verb просити 'to ask' yields masculine nominative singular прошь, from earlier *pros-j-ŭ. In those verbs whose stem ends in a vowel that derives from an original nasal, such as начяти (cf. first person singular present начьну), the nasal reappears in the past active participle (which therefore uses the suffix -ъш- since it is attached to a consonant). Verbs with the -ну- suffix frequently, but not always, drop the suffix when forming the past active participle. The following table provides examples of the different formations.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	Stem	 	Participle
I	 	нєсти	 	carry	 	нєс-	 	нєс-ъш-
 	 	начяти	 	begin	 	начьн-	 	начьн-ъш-
II	 	погыбнути	 	perish	 	погыб-	 	погыб-ъш-
 	 	 	 	 	 	погыбну-	 	погыбну-въш-
III	 	знати	 	know	 	зна-	 	зна-въш-
IV	 	просити	 	ask	 	прош-	 	прош-ьш-
 	 	 	 	 	 	проси-	 	проси-въш-
V	 	ѣсти	 	eat	 	ѣд-	 	ѣд-ъш-
 	 	вѣдѣти	 	know	 	вѣдѣ-	 	вѣдѣ-въш-
31.1.1 Past Participle Active: Short Form

As with other adjectives, the past active participle inflects in both a definite (long) form and an indefinite (short) form. The verb нєсти 'to carry', with stem нєс-ъш- serves to illustrate the declension of the short form of the past active participle.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	нєсъ	 	нєсъ	 	нєсъши
A	 	нєсъшь	 	нєсъшє	 	нєсъшю
G	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъшѣ
L	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши
D	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъши
I	 	нєсъшємь	 	нєсъшємь	 	нєсъшєю
V	 	нєсъ	 	нєсъ	 	нєсъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши
A	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши
G	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъшю
L	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъшю	 	нєсъшю
D	 	нєсъшєма	 	нєсъшєма	 	нєсъшяма
I	 	нєсъшєма	 	нєсъшєма	 	нєсъшяма
V	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	нєсъшє	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъшѣ
A	 	нєсъшѣ	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъшѣ
G	 	нєсъшь	 	нєсъшь	 	нєсъшь
L	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшяхъ
D	 	нєсъшємъ	 	нєсъшємъ	 	нєсъшямъ
I	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъши	 	нєсъшями
V	 	нєсъшє	 	нєсъшя	 	нєсъшѣ
31.1.2 Past Participle Active: Long Form

As we have seen with the present active participle, the past active participle inflects with long-endings belonging to the soft declension of adjectives. Again нєсти 'to carry', with stem нєс-ъш-, serves to illustrate the paradigm.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	нєсъи	 	нєсъшєѥ	 	нєсъшяя
A	 	нєсъшьи	 	нєсъшєѥ	 	нєсъшюю
G	 	нєсъшѥго	 	нєсъшѥго	 	нєсъшѥѣ
L	 	нєсъшѥмь	 	нєсъшѥмь	 	нєсъшѥи
D	 	нєсъшѥму	 	нєсъшѥму	 	нєсъшѥи
I	 	нєсъшимь	 	нєсъшимь	 	нєсъшѥю
V	 	нєсъи	 	нєсъшєѥ	 	нєсъшяя
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшии	 	нєсъшии
A	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшии	 	нєсъшии
G	 	нєсъшѥю	 	нєсъшѥю	 	нєсъшѥю
L	 	нєсъшѥю	 	нєсъшѥю	 	нєсъшѥю
D	 	нєсъшима	 	нєсъшима	 	нєсъшима
I	 	нєсъшима	 	нєсъшима	 	нєсъшима
V	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшии	 	нєсъшии
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	нєсъшии	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшѣѣ
A	 	нєсъшѣѣ	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшѣѣ
G	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшихъ
L	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшихъ	 	нєсъшихъ
D	 	нєсъшимъ	 	нєсъшимъ	 	нєсъшимъ
I	 	нєсъшими	 	нєсъшими	 	нєсъшими
V	 	нєсъшии	 	нєсъшяя	 	нєсъшѣѣ
31.2 Past Participle Passive
The past passive participle denotes an action already viewed as completed by the time of the action represented by the main verb of the clause, and it implies that the referent of the noun modified underwent or received the action. The Old Russian past passive participles function analogously to their English cousins, such as eaten or (having been) washed.

Old Russian preserves three basic suffixes representing the past passive participle: -тъ, -нъ, and -єнъ. Each suffix yields an adjective which declines according to the hard twofold adjective declension. A given verb typically forms a past passive participle with only one of the suffixes, though exceptions do occur. This parallels the situation in English, where eat, say, only forms the participle with the suffix -en (eaten), not with the suffix -ed (*eated). Precise rules for the distribution of the suffixes, however, are difficult to formulate.

31.2.1 The -tŭ Suffix

We find the -тъ suffix employed to form the past passive participle with a number of verbs. Often these verbs have infinitive stems in -я- which derives from an original nasal CS *-ę-. We also find the suffix with roots containing -л- or -р-. Moreover we find the -тъ suffix with some verbs that take the -ну- suffix, as well as some with stem in -и-. The following table lists some examples.

Infinitive	 	CS	 	Meaning	 	Participle
начяти	 	*na-čę-ti	 	begin	 	начя-тъ
прострѣти	 	*pro-ster-ti	 	stretch out	 	пострѣ-тъ
двигнути	 	*dvig-nǫ-ti	 	move	 	двигну-тъ
убити	 	*u-bĭj-ti	 	kill	 	уби-тъ
31.2.2 The -enŭ Suffix

The past passive participle in -єнъ tends to appear in a wide array of verbs, typically those whose infinitive-aorist stem ends in a consonant or a palatal glide. Often verbs taking the -ну- suffix will drop the suffix and append -єнъ to the resulting stem. The following table lists a number of examples.

Infinitive	 	CS	 	Meaning	 	Participle
нєсти	 	*nes-ti	 	carry	 	нєс-єнъ
рєчи	 	*rek-ti	 	say	 	рєч-єнъ
двигнути	 	*dvig-nǫ-ti	 	move	 	движ-єнъ
убити	 	*u-bĭj-ti	 	kill	 	убь-єнъ
We see in the participles of рєчи 'to say' and двигнути 'to move' that the initial vowel of the -єнъ suffix triggers first palatalization in stem-final velars.

31.2.3 The -nŭ Suffix

The past passive participle in -нъ tends to occur with roots whose infinitive-aorist stem ends in -а- or -ѣ-. However, знати 'to know' also forms a participle in -нъ even though the stem properly ends in a glide ([znaj-]). The following chart provides some examples.

Infinitive	 	CS	 	Meaning	 	Participle
писати	 	*pis-a-ti	 	write	 	писа-нъ
видѣти	 	*vid-ě-ti	 	see	 	видѣ-нъ
знати	 	*znaj-ti	 	know	 	зна-нъ
32 Present Participle Passive
The present passive participle in general denotes an action contemporaneous with the main verb of the clause, and which is acting upon the referent of the noun modified. English has no specific morphological formation to represent the present passive participle and so must resort to periphrastic constructions, such as being eaten. Consider the statement I saw a hamburger being eaten yesterday. Here being eaten is the present passive participle modifying hamburger. Since the whole statement refers to past time, this action is not occuring at the time of utterance; rather being eaten represents an action that was still ongoing when the action of the main verb, saw, took place.

Old Russian forms the present passive participle by means of one of three suffixes: -омъ, -ємъ, and -имъ. Verbs of classes I and II generally employ the suffix -омъ. Verbs of class III typically employ the suffix -ємъ, while class IV verbs show -имъ. The suffix is generally added to the present tense stem. The following chart lists some examples.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	Participle
I	 	нєсти	 	carry	 	нєс-омъ
II	 	двигнути	 	move	 	двиг-омъ
III	 	знати	 	know	 	зна-ємъ
 	 	писати	 	write	 	пиш-ємъ
IV	 	водити	 	lead	 	вод-имъ
V	 	ѣсти	 	eat	 	ѣд-єнъ
Old Russian may employ the present passive participle in a periphrastic construction to approximate a true passive, as in English: нєсоми суть 'we are being carried'. The tense of the construction is determined by the tense of the finite verb, here суть.

33 Second Conjugation
Verbs of the second conjugation are characterized by the presence of a nasal suffix -н- added to the stem in the present tense. This is then followed by the thematic vowel, historically *-e/o-, in a manner analogous to that of verbs of the first conjugation. Thus we find a suffix -ну- in the 1st person singular and 3rd person plural, but elsewhere we find the suffix -нє-. This suffix typically remains throughout the entire present system, and we also find it in the infinitive. In the past system (apart from the imperfect, whose stem often derives from the present stem), we find variable behavior: some verbs retain the nasal suffix in the past system, others drop the nasal element, and still others show forms both with and without the suffix. For this class of verbs, therefore, one cannot necessarily obtain the aorist stem, say, by simply dropping the infinitive suffix -ти and undoing any changes to the final consonants: with certain verbs one must additionally remove the nasal suffix -ну- that appears in the infinitive. Moreover, the final consonant of some verbal roots undergoes a shift when the nasal element is affixed, and this change must be undone to arrive at the proper stem. The following table lists some verbs that belong to Class II.

Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	1st Sg.	 	2nd Sg.	 	Infin.-Aor. Stem
гы(б)нути	 	perish	 	гы(б)ну	 	гы(б)нєши	 	гыб-
о-свьнути	 	rise early	 	о-свьну	 	о-свьнєши	 	о-свьт-
съ-гънути	 	bend	 	съ-гъну	 	съ-гънєши	 	съ-гъб-
у-вянути	 	fade	 	у-вяну	 	у-вянєши	 	у-вяд-
Note in the above chart how, for each verb, the infinitive-aorist stem exhibits a final consonant which frequently does not appear in those forms which employ the nasal suffix.

The verbs двигнути 'to move', стати 'to stand', and у-сънути 'to fall asleep' illustrate the paradigms of Class II verbs. Note that, rather uniquely among Class II verbs, стати 'to stand' does not exhibit the nasal suffix in the infinitive. Moreover this verb only forms the aorist with forms lacking the nasal suffix. The other two verbs, by contrast, show two distinct new aorist formations: one with the nasal suffix, one without. In particular in those aorist forms of у-сънути 'to fall asleep' which lack the nasal suffix, the stem-final -п- appears before the desinences. In addition, we note that root-final consonants are subject to the rules of palatalization in those forms which lack the nasal suffix. Consider the chart below.

Class II	 	двиг-нє-	 	ста-нє-	 	у-съ(п)-нє-
Present	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	двигну	 	стану	 	у-съну
2	 	двигнєши	 	станєши	 	у-сънєши
3	 	двигнєть	 	станєть	 	у-сънєть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	двигнєвѣ	 	станєвѣ	 	у-сънєвѣ
2	 	двигнєта	 	станєта	 	у-сънєта
3	 	двигнєта	 	станєта	 	у-сънєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	двигнємъ	 	станємъ	 	у-сънємъ
2	 	двигнєтє	 	станєтє	 	у-сънєтє
3	 	двигнуть	 	стануть	 	у-сънуть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	двигни	 	стани	 	у-съни
3	 	двигни	 	стани	 	у-съни
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	двигнѣвѣ	 	станѣвѣ	 	у-сънѣвѣ
2	 	двигнѣта	 	станѣта	 	у-сънѣта
3	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	двигнѣмъ	 	станѣмъ	 	у-сънѣмъ
2	 	двигнѣтє	 	станѣтє	 	у-сънѣтє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	двигна	 	стана	 	у-съна
Fem. N	 	двигнучи	 	станучи	 	у-сънучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	двигномъ	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	двигняахъ	 	станяахъ	 	у-съняахъ
2	 	двигняашє	 	станяашє	 	у-съняашє
3	 	двигняашє	 	станяашє	 	у-съняашє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	двигняаховѣ	 	станяаховѣ	 	у-съняаховѣ
2	 	двигняашєта	 	станяашєта	 	у-съняашєта
3	 	двигняашєта	 	станяашєта	 	у-съняашєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	двигняахомъ	 	станяахомъ	 	у-съняахомъ
2	 	двигняашєтє	 	станяашєтє	 	у-съняашєтє
3	 	двигняаху	 	станяаху	 	у-съняаху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	двигнухъ	 	-	 	у-сънухъ
2	 	двигну	 	-	 	у-съну
3	 	двигну	 	-	 	у-съну
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	двигнуховѣ	 	-	 	у-сънуховѣ
2	 	двигнуста	 	-	 	у-сънуста
3	 	двигнуста	 	-	 	у-сънуста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	двигнухомъ	 	-	 	у-сънухомъ
2	 	двигнустє	 	-	 	у-сънустє
3	 	двигнуша	 	-	 	у-сънуша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	двигохъ	 	стахъ	 	у-съпохъ
2	 	движє	 	ста	 	у-съпє
3	 	движє	 	ста	 	у-съпє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	двигоховѣ	 	стаховѣ	 	у-съпоховѣ
2	 	двигоста	 	стаста	 	у-съпоста
3	 	двигоста	 	стаста	 	у-съпоста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	двигохомъ	 	стахомъ	 	у-съпохомъ
2	 	двигостє	 	стастє	 	у-съпостє
3	 	двигоша	 	сташа	 	у-съпоша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	двигнувъ	 	-	 	у-сънувъ
Fem. N	 	двигнувъши	 	-	 	у-сънувъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	двигъ	 	ставъ	 	у-съпъ
Fem. N	 	двигъши	 	ставъши	 	у-съпъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	двигнулъ	 	-	 	у-сънулъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	двиглъ	 	сталъ	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	двигнутъ	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	движєнъ	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	двигнути	 	стати	 	у-съ(п)нути
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	двигнутъ	 	статъ	 	у-сънутъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	движєньѥ	 	станьѥ	 	у-съпєньѥ
34 The Genitive Case
The Old Russian genitive case serves a wide range of functions. In general it provides a complement to both verbs and nouns. In its widest sense, the genitive case denotes a sphere of validity for the words which it complements. This sphere of validity might describe the whole, of which the modified noun specifies a specific part: compare English one of my cookies, where the genitive of my cookies describes the class of objects from which one denotes a specific item. Or the genitive might denotes a quality: English a statue of gold, where of gold describes the material of which the statue is made. The sphere of validity might denote possession: Theresa's book, where the genitive Theresa's serves to denote that the book belongs to her. Or the genitive might denote a more general relation, such as familial: Olga's son. Moreover, within Common Slavic the original ablative case disappeared, and the genitive case adopted many of its functions: denoting separation, e.g. far from here, or source, e.g. a man from Idaho.

When the genitive denotes the entirety out of which a part is being selected, scholars generally term this the partitive genitive. The following provides an example of this use of the genitive: бѣ бо ихъ мало 'For there was a small number of them' (Olga's Revenge).

The following example, by contrast, illustrates the ablatival genitive, where the genitive serves to denote source or separation: бѣжи грѣха 'flee from sin!' (set expression, cf. Le Guillou, 1972)

More typical, however, is the possessive genitive. This simply denotes to whom or what the complemented noun belongs. Consider the following examples:

деревлене ѹбиша игорѧ и дружину єго 'The Derevlians killed Igor and his retinue' (Olga's Revenge).
и сътвориша градъкъ въ имя брата своего старѣишаго 'And they made the city in the name of their older brother' (Primary Chronicle).
Though Old Russian frequently employs the genitive of a noun to denote possession, this is by no means the only method of signalling possession, or more generally relation. Old Russian quite frequently employs a so-called possessive adjective with the same goal. Consider the following examples:

ѡтьць мистишинъ 'father of Mistisha' (Olga's Revenge).
ѡтроци свѣньлъжи 'Sveinald's retainers' (Death of Igor).
The term 'possessive adjective', however, is something of a misnomer. The particular relation expressed by the adjective need not be one specifically of possession. More generally it can be one of simple relation: о пълку Игоревѣ 'about the campaign of Igor' (Igor Tale). It would be difficult to argue here that Igor 'owns' the campaign. The possessive adjective Игоревъ simply relates the modified noun to Igor.

Some verbs in fact typically take their complement, i.e. what can be thought of as their direct object, in the genitive case. Such verbs often have meanings that denote perception (e.g. hearing or seeing), filling, lacking, or other senses which describe either an essential separation or division of a part from the whole. Consider the following examples of the genitive complement of specific verbs:

жестоко ѥсть слово се, къто можеть ѥго слушати 'This is a hard saying; who can hear it? (Ostromir Gospel, Luke 6.60, cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 1, p. 437).
иже колижъдо напоить ѥдиного отъ малꙑихъ сихъ чашѫ стѹденꙑ водꙑ тъкмо въ имѧ оченика..., не погѹбить мьздꙑ своѥѩ 'And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple..., he shall in no wise lose his reward' (Ostromir Gospel, Matthew 10.42, cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 2, p. 310).
Among the uses of the genitive with verbs is its use as the complement of the supine. Inasmuch as the supine is a verbal noun, this amounts to an instance of the objective genitive, i.e. a use of the genitive to denote the object of the action described by another noun. We find similar usage in English: the assassination of Lincoln, where of Lincoln represents the the recipient of the underlying action denoted by the noun assassination. Consider the following example of the genitive object of the supine: приходиша отъ Рима учитъ васъ 'They came from Rome in order to teach you' (Primary Chronicle). Perhaps more literally, '... for the teaching of you'.

We have already seen that Slavic languages in general, and Old Russian in particular, have extended the use of the genitive to direct objects of any transitive verb under certain conditions (cf. Sections 15 & 29): if the direct object is a male human being, or if the verb is negated. Scholars generally view the use of the genitive with male human direct objects as having started with proper names, then extending to an ever-increasing class of nouns. We provide here some further examples of the genitive-accusative for convenience.

деревлене ѹбиша игорѧ и дружину єго 'The Derevlians killed Igor and his retinue' (Olga's Revenge). Here we see that the male human being игорѧ 'Igor' takes the genitive case, even though it is the direct object, while the common noun дружину 'retinue' shows the accusative.
поимємъ жену єго вольгу за кнѧзь свои малъ, и святослава 'Let us take his wife, Olga, for our prince Mal, and Svjatoslav' (Olga's Revenge). This example makes clear the different treatment of nouns representing male and female human beings: the female takes the accusative, жєну... вольгу; but the male takes the genitive, святослава.
посла Володимеръ сынъ свои Романа 'Vladimir sent his son Roman' (Laurentian Chronicle). Here we see that, though referring to a male human being, the direct object сынъ свои 'his son' remains in the accusative. It is only with the proper name Романа that we see a shift to the genitive for the direct object.
налѣзоша быкъ вєликъ и сильнъ, и повєлѣ раздражити быка 'They found a great and strong bull, and he ordered (them) to irritate the bull' (Primary Chronicle). This provides an example in which a non-numan animal, быка 'bull', takes the genitive when functioning as direct object. In this example the word быкъ shows the expected accusative ending as direct object of налѣзоша 'they found', but the genitive ending as the direct object of раздражити 'to irritate'.
The following provides for convenience a further example of the use of the genitive with negation: или нє будеть на немь знамения 'but if there is no mark on him' (Russian Truth [Russkaja Pravda]). Scholars generally suppose that the genitive with negation, in particular with the subject of the verb, likely begins with the sense of a partitive genitive: 'there is none of a thing'.

As part of its role of marking the sphere of validity, the genitive may serve to mark a segment of time. The following examples illustrate the use of the genitive of time at which or within which an event takes place.

бишася дєнь, бишася другыи, трєтьяго дни къ полудню падоша стязи игорєвы 'They fought one day, they fought a second; on the third day toward midday Igor's standards fell' (Igor Tale).
того лѣта, коли Алъбрахтъ владыка ризкии умрьлъ 'In that year, when Albrecht, king of the Rigans, died' (Smolenskaja Gramota, 1229, cf. Vlasto, 1986, p. 214).
того же лѣта поиде князь великии василеи дмитреевичь в орду 'In that year the great prince Vasili Dmitreevich went to the Horde' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
35 Passive, Middle & Reflexive
One way of understanding the difference between active and passive voices is through the distinction among the roles of the agent, patient, and the grammatical subject of a clause. Let us begin with an example from English: the dog bites the man. The agent of this clause is the dog. Generally, we say the agent is the participant who logically performs the action. The action here is that of biting, of latching one's teeth onto the skin of another, and the dog is the one doing the latching of teeth. By contrast, the man is here the patient. In general we say that the patient is the one logically undergoing or receiving the action. If we understand latching-of-teeth as the action, then the man is the one receiving this action, not the one performing it. Finally, we say the grammatical subject is the participant "doing the verb" as it appears in the clause. Here bites is the verb as stated in the clause, and the one who bites is the dog. Thus the dog is the grammatical subject, while simultaneously being the agent. When grammatical subject and agent coincide in this way, we say the clause expresses the active voice.

However we can also express this same action, the latching of teeth that the dog is doing on the man's skin, in such a way that the dog is no longer the subject. In fact we can make the patient, the man, the subject. In English we accomplish this as follows: the man is bitten by the dog. This represents the same logical action: the dog latches his teeth onto the man's skin. Thus the dog remains the agent, since his teeth do the latching; and the man remains the patient, since he's the unfortunate recipient of this latching-of-teeth. But now the grammatical subject has changed: when we seek who does the verb as stated, namely who is bitten, now it is the man. The man is now the grammatical subject. And he is simultaneously the patient. When the grammatical subject and patient coincide in this way, we say the clause expresses the passive voice.

As one can see from the above discussion, the verb form itself actually plays a crucial role in determining whether the clause appears in the active or passive voice. If we decide at the outset that we wish to express the logical action in which a dog's teeth latch on to a man's skin, then by choosing to use the specific verb form bites, we must necessarily cast the clause into the active voice; while if we choose to employ the verb form is bitten, then we must necessarily equate the grammatical subject with the patient and employ the passive voice. In this way we can say that English verbal morphology itself expresses voice, both active and passive: bites is an active verb form, is bitten is passive.

We may make one further distinction. Consider for a moment a different situation: the man soaked the rag in the sink. Here we have once again an active statement: the agent, the man, is also the grammatical subject. And again we may rephrase this in the passive voice: the rag was soaked by the man in the sink. Now the patient, the rag, is the grammatical subject. But consider one more variation: the rag soaked in the sink. This is new: the rag still receives the net result of the action, if we conceive of the action as "get something wet", as in the initial rendition of the sentence. But here there is no external agent, and so if anyone or anything is logically "doing" the action of getting something wet in this third rendition, it seems to be the rag that's getting it done. And the rag is the grammatical subject. This, therefore, seems to occupy a middle ground between the active and passive voices, combining elements of both, and so scholars tend to call this the middle voice.

Archaically, Proto-Indo-European itself distinguished active and passive voices by means of verbal morphology. For example, Greek phero: 'I carry' expressed the active voice, while a change in verbal ending to pheromai 'I am (being) carried' denoted the shift to the passive voice. In fact the forms of the passive voice were also emplyed for the middle voice, and so we sometimes find these desinences termed the mediopassive endings. Though this state of affairs in verbal morphology was inherited by many of the daughter languages, such as Latin, others seem largely to have lost this feature. Among those who lost the majority of the specifically passive verbal morphology were the Slavic languages. However this merely left the door open for the Slavic languages to develop their own expression of the middle and passive voices, a different method of morphological encoding of the same idea. In this section we discuss the particular expression of the middle and passive voices found in Old Russian.

35.1 The Passive Voice
Old Russian, along with Old Church Slavonic, actually did inherit one particular manner of constructing the passive voice directly from Proto-Indo-European. Though Slavic did away with "simple" passive morphology, that is a passive voice expressed by specific endings applied directly to the verbal root, it retained a periphrastic or compound formation that we also find in the majority of the subfamilies of Indo-European. In fact the example discussed above employed the English reflex of this same passive construction: is bitten. That is, Old Russian and OCS together can form the passive voice by joining a conjugated form of 'to be' with a passive participle. The English example specifically employs the past passive participle, bitten; English has no present passive participle and must therefore use an additional collocation with being: is being bitten. Old Russian and OCS preserve both present and past passive participles, however, and may employ either in a periphrastic passive formation.

The present passive participle denotes that the action continues during the time frame of the finite verb, that it was not complete by the time of the main verb. Consider the following examples.

тѣмь любимъ бѣ своимь отьцьмь 'For this he was loved by his father' (Primary Chronicle). To express the full sense of the present participle, it might be preferable to rephrase this, rather awkwardly, as '... he was being loved...'. The finite verb form бѣ places the action in the past, but the action represented by the participle любимъ continues throughout the span of time represented by бѣ.
съгрѣшихомъ, и казими єсмы 'We have sinned and are being punished' (Primary Chronicle).
When the passive construction employs a past passive participle, the connotation can straddle the border between emphasis on the completed action and emphasis on the state resulting from the completion of that action. Consider the examples below.

погрєбєнъ бысть Игорь 'Igor was buried' (Primary Chronicle). Here the most straightforward interpretation is that this focuses on a past action which happens to be passive, i.e. the patient and grammatical subject are identical. Compare this with the following example.
бѣ жє имя єи рєчєно Олєна 'And her name was called Helen' (Primary Chronicle). Here the action of calling is evidently secondary, and it is the resulting state (of having a particular name by which one is called) which is the primary focus of the passive construction with the past passive participle.
35.2 The Reflexive & Middle
In contrast to an action expressed through the passive voice, we may also note some actions as expressed are reflexive. A reflexive action is one in which the object of the action happens to be identical with the subject. Returning to our example of the dog and the action of latching teeth, the reflexive action would be the dog bites himself. English denotes the reflexivity of the action by marking the direct object him as reflexive, or anaphoric, by appending -self. This is properly distinct from the passive voice. With the passive expression the dog is bitten, we may ask by whom; with the dog bites himself, we know the answer.

We have already seen (cf. Section 8.2) that Old Russian has a reflexive pronoun сєбє 'oneself'. Whereas the English reflexive pronouns change depending on number and gender, as in herself or themselves, the Old Russian reflexive remains constant for person and number. Its form only marks case.

Within the Slavic family of languages, it seems that the reflexive pronoun was early co-opted to form a new expression of the passive voice, or even the middle voice. Originally this started as a true reflexive, and throughout Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic the reflexive pronoun can retain its true reflexive meaning. But at all stages of the written language we also find uses of the reflexive pronoun where reflexivity of the action seems not to be the author's intention, but rather a middle or passive expression of the action. In this sense Old Russian and OCS both parallel to a large degree modern Spanish. While the modern Spanish reflexive se is cognate with Old Russian ся, in a collocation like se habla espan'ol, one is not saying that "Spanish speaks itself", as if Spanish were endowed with the capacity of self expression, but rather that "Spanish is spoken (here)".

Such mediopassive constructions expressed through the use of the reflexive pronoun early allowed for fairly free placement of the pronoun. Typically such constructions employed the accusative form ся or dative си. As enclitics these often followed the first accented word of the clause. But as the mediopassive-reflexive construction evolved, these forms tended to follow immediately upon the verb. Starting in the 14th century we find the reflexive reduced to -сь when following verb forms ending in a vowel. Slowly the post-verbal position became the norm, and in modern Russian it has become the rule. But this latter state of affairs does not seem to have become fixed until sometime around the early 18th century. Up until that time, the reflexives could occur somewhat freely within the clause. Where the verb generally required a dative object, the form си generally denoted the middle or passive: hence судити 'to judge' (with dative), but судити си 'to be judged'; similarly соснити 'to join (to)' (with dative), but соснити си 'to be joined, to join together'. The following list provides some examples.

коньчашя ся книги сия 'this book was finished' (Sbornik Svjatoslava Jaroslaviča). Here the reflexive pronoun almost certainly does not denote a reflexive, since the book did not do the finishing, but rather the writer. This collocation denotes a true passive.
донєлѣ жє ся миръ състоить 'while the world lasts' or 'while the world remains' (gramota Mstislava Volodimiroviča). Here the verb състоꙗти itself, without the reflexive pronoun, means 'to be in place'. As such there is no direct object for an active sense or reflexive, and as a result a passive sense cannot obtain. We therefore take this use of ся as marking the middle voice.
а нє можємъ ся вмѣститися в пєчєрє' 'and we cannot fit in the cave' (Ipat'jevskij spisok, 1425). With this late example we find a redundant use of the reflexive pronoun ся, both preceding and following the infinitive въмѣстити 'to lay, to put in'. The translation here employs a verb, 'fit', that can be construed as active or middle in English. The Old Russian, however, may be plausibly construed as reflexive ('we cannot fit ourselves in the cave'), middle ('we cannot fit in the cave'), or passive ('we cannot be fit(ted) in the cave').
яко жє пишєтся 'as is written' (Primary Chronicle).
си вси звахуться отъ Грєкъ Вєликая Скуфь 'all these (people) were called "Great Scythia" by the Greeks' (Primary Chronicle). Here the prepositional phrase отъ Грєкъ 'by the Greeks' denoting the agent makes clear the intended interpretation as a true passive.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 8
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
V. The Tartar Invasion
The final element in our understanding of the history surrounding the "classical" period of Old Russian language and literature is the Tartar invasion. Linguistic change is rarely so drastic as political change or the incursion of an invading force upon a foreign land. We therefore cannot say that the "classical" period of Old Russian literature ends with the Tartar invasion. Nevertheless the Tartar invasion provides a particular event that nicely coincides with a general period in which we see the Old Russian language in transition. Moreover the Tartar invasion provides an impetus for political and cultural shifts that ultimately accentuate dialectal distinctions within the East Slavic speaking community, and at the same time it provides a catalyst for a transfer from Kiev to Moscow of the cultural center of literary production.

The Old Russian accounts of the Tartar invasion describe the onslaught as if it came out of nowhere. From the perspective of the Eastern Slavs, that was largely true: what drove the Tartars westward during that particular period were largely forces whose origin lay in the movements and stuggles within and between tribes located far away in the Central Asian expanse. The most obvious result of Slavic contact with marauding armies mirrored the impact of so many other so-called barbarian tribes as they impinged on Europe from the east: destruction and disarray. But the destruction wrought by the Tartars struck deep into the culture and the character of the Eastern Slavs. And part of the reason for the profound effect of Tartar subjugation within the land of the Rus may be sought in the general turn of events that happened to coincide with the Tartar advance. Below we seek to outline some of these events.

V.i The Slow Decline
As it happens, the outlook was already bleak for the major powers then controlling commerce in and around the Black Sea. In particular the great empire of Byzantium was on the wane. Byzantium had formerly built itself into a fearsome military power armed with awe-inspiring weaponry, such as the renowned "Greek fire", a kind of flame-throwing technology that struck terror into the hearts of attacking navies. But in the centuries leading up to the Tartar invasion, Byzantium's military prowess had begun to lose its luster.

Old Russian sources tell us of various East Slavic sorties against Byzantium in the 10th century. By in large these were as often successful as not. But for the most part they do not seem to have had a lasting effect on the Empire as a whole: rather they often seem to have been used as a ploy by the Rus to better their terms of trade with their most important economic partner. But the 11th century brought a turn for the worse. In particular in the year 1071 the Seljuk Turks defeated Byzantine forces in Armenia and then proceeded to lay waste to the rest of Anatolia. As if this were not enough, the same year saw the Normans dispossess the Byzantines of their territories in Italy and from there proceed to harry their Balkan possessions (Adams et al., 1966).

The Turkic and Norman attacks, however, merely provided the aperitif. The year 1095 saw the opening of the Crusades, and the continual march of armies through Byzantine territory on their way to the Holy Land took its toll on the Empire. The same general mobilization of forces and shifting of supply lines was accompanied by an interruption of Byzantium's sea-borne trade. Weakened by decades of continual fighting, in the 12th century the the Empire enlisted the help of the Venetian navy to protect its sea routes. This however led to the adverse result in which the Venetians monopolized regional commerce, and so Byzantium eventually had recourse to luring in other Italian merchants to offset the Venetian monopoly. This could not, however, turn around Byzantine fortunes. The capstone of the Empire's decline finally came in the year 1204, when the Crusaders sacked Byzantium (Adams et al., 1966).

The decline of Byzantium was in turn a bad omen for Kiev, given the close economic ties between the two. Moreover, even what trade remained between the two cultural centers was further hindered by additional tribal migrations. Many of the same forces that spurred Tartar westward expansion, as well as the Tartar expansion itself, had also driven other tribes inhabiting the steppes to push westward. Among these are counted the Polovtsians (or Cumans, or Qipchaqs), a nomadic tribe of west Central Asia. During this general period of unrest they migrated into the region of the lower Dnieper. As with many of the steppe peoples, they displayed a keen military prowess, and they frequently attacked the Rus. Though, unlike the Tartars, they seem not to have displayed any imperial aspirations, their incessant attacks nevertheless drastically reduced the efficiency of trade with Byzantium.

Perhaps Kiev could have managed the severing of trade relations with its southern partner, were that the only major issue with which it had to contend. But at the same time throughout Rus we find a general collapse of the rota system, the rotation by which kingdoms were doled out to the various members of the ruling Rjurikid dynasty, and overall authority fell in turn to each according to seniority (Adams et al., 1966). Rivalries ultimately developed into internecine struggles, with brother killing brother within the dynasty. As a result of dynastic strife other principalities rose to prominence: Galicia and Volhynia to the southwest united under prince Roman; Novgorod expanded into the sparsely populated regions to the north and east in search of further sources of trade.

It is during this period that we see the first signs of the rise of Vladimir-Suzdal. This region developed in fits and starts. The first cultural and political center of note lay in Rostov. This soon passed to Suzdal. This in turn ceded authority to the city Vladimir. And finally, some time later, Moscow, early something of a backwater, rose to prominence. Though accessible by the water routes that greased the cogs of regional trade, the region's location within the forested stretches north of the steppe likely provided some protection from the raiding bands that harried more southerly neighbors like Kiev. Whatever the reason for its rise, the region's ascendence came into stark relief in the year 1169: in this year the prince Andrew Bogljubsky sent a force that sacked Kiev. But rather than relocate to this grand center of culture that was the shining jewel of old Rus, he was content to continue his rule from his current capital of Vladimir. This branded Kiev as a city in decline (Adams et al., 1966; Hingley, 2003).

V.ii The Beginning of the End
From the perspective of the history of East and Central Asia, the Tartar invasion was just one more phase in the expansion of the great Mongol empire established by Chinggis Khan. As the Mongol empire expanded its army came to mirror the multitude of ethnicities incorporated within its borders. By the time the Empire's expansion necessitated the foray into the lands of the Rus, the ethnic Mongols largely remained confined to the nobility; the fighting force itself comprised numerous tribes, many among them Turkic, and among these the Tartars (or Tatars) formed a large component of the armies that pushed west along the steppe. Though the nobility could generally trace its lineage back to Chinggis Khan, intermarriage and the the heavy Turkic influence eventually compelled the nobility itself to adopt the Turkic tongue, and the term Tartar came to signify the multiethnic fighting force as a whole. Nevertheless the nobility maintained much of the cultural and political traditions handed down from Chinggis Khan (Ostrowski, 2009).

The first appearance of the multiethnic Mongol fighting force on the western Eurasian steppe came in the year 1222 under the leadership of the generals Jebe and Sube'etei (Subudei). They pushed around the Caspian Sea, through the Caucasus Mountains, and into the Crimea where they wintered. In the face of the new enemy, the Rus and the Polovtsians set aside their mutual animosity and equipped a force that set out to defend their mutual territory. The Mongols defeated the combined Rus-Polovtsian force north of the Black Sea in 1223, then pushed northeast to defeat the Volga Bulgars on their way home (Ostrowski, 2009). It would be another 14 years before the East Slavs would again need to brace themselves against Mongol attack.

December of the year 1237 saw the return of the Mongol army, which unleashed a fury of destruction on a scale unheard of up to that time. The general Sube'etei returned with this force, this time accompanied by Batu, grandson of Chinggis Khan. The Tartar wrath first fell upon the city of Rjazan; this yielded after a 5-day siege, was sacked and destroyed. The Tartar custom was to sieze a city, kill most of the inhabitants, sell the rest into slavery, loot the city, then set it ablaze (Hingley, 2003). And such was the fate of each Russian city in their path: next in line was Moscow, still a small outpost. But its relative unimportance was no aid in abetting Mongol ferocity, and they burned it to the ground. Next fell Vladimir, then Suzdal (Ostrowski, 2009).

Novgorod, however, provided a notable exception. Novgorod avoided the ransacking that the Tartars visited upon other Russian polities. Part of the reason may lie in the spring thaw that likely impeded the Tartar advance. But the principal reason seems to have been prince Alexander Nevsky's willingness to pay tribute. Sources suggest that he immediately agreed to submit to Tartar authority in order to avoid the ravages experienced by neighboring principalities.

Not satisfied with the extent of his conquests, Batu regrouped only to launch another offensive in 1240. This carried a wake of destruction no less massive than the first. Batu's army destroyed Kiev, Chernigov, Perejaslav, and other towns in the southern regions of Rus territory. His army then continued headlong into southern Europe, reaching Hungary before turning back upon news that the Great Khan Ugedey had died (Ostrowski, 2009). Guided by internal politics, Batu hastened to the imperial capital, only to be disappointed in his hopes to become Great Khan himself. Instead he was installed as khan over the western region, which included the Russian territories recently conquered. He established a capital at Saray on the lower Volga, and the realm, the Qipchaq Khanate, came to be known throughout Europe as the Golden Horde (Ostrowski, 2009).

Tales of the devastation wrought by the invading Tartars pervade numerous Saints' Lives in the East Slavic literature of the period. In the ecclesiastical world-view embodied by these early texts, the Russians seem to have initially interpreted the advent of the Tartars as divine punishment for their sins. But this interpretation appears to have fallen away within a couple decades of the original invasion (Ostrowski, 2009).

We also find accounts of the wretched state of the Russian lands after the initial invasion written by contemporary travelers to the region. In particular we find the travel journal of a Papal envoy, John of Plano Carpini (Giovanni da Pian del Carpine), who passed through the southern stretches of Russia on his was to the capital of the Golden Horde. One passage recounts a story illustrating the iron fist with which the Tartars imposed their rule, with general disregard for the lives of princes who submitted to their authority (Beazley, 1903, p.47).

Chapter	 	Latin	 	English
3	 	Et etiam ad meridiem tanquam Deo inclinant, & inclinare faciunt alios nobiles, qui se reddunt eisdem. Vnde nuper contigit quod Michael, qui fuit vnus de magnis ducibus Russiae, cum iuisset ad se reddendum Bati, fecerunt eum prius inter duos ignes transire : Post hoc dixerunt, quod ad meridiem Cyngis can inclinaret.	 	And moreover as they bow at midday to God, they also oblige those nobles who have surrendered to them to bow. Whence recently it happened that, when Michael, who was one of the great princes of Russia, had come to submit to Batu, they obliged him to pass among two fires; after this they ordered that he bow before Chinggis Khan at midday.
 	 	Qui respondit, quod Bati & seruis suis inclinaret libenter, sed imagini hominis mortui non inclinaret, quia non licet hoc facere Christianis. Et cum saepe diceretur, quod inclinaret, & nollet, mandauit ei praedictus per filium Ieroslai, quod occideretur si non inclinaret.	 	And he responded that he would bow freely to Batu and his servants, but that he would not bow to the image of a dead man, since it was not permitted for Christians to do this. And as he repeatedly stated that he would not bow, and that he refused, the aforementioned compelled him through the son of Jaroslav, that he should be cut down should he not bow.
 	 	Qui respondit, quod potius vellet mori, quam hoc faceret, quia non liceret. At ille satellitem vnum misit, qui tam diu contra cor eum in ventre calce percussit, quousque deficeret.	 	And he responded that he would rather die than do that, as it was not permitted. And so the other sent one of his guards, and he beat against the heart in his chest with his heel for as long as he refused.
 	 	Tunc quidam de suis militibus qui astabat confortans eum dixit : Esto robustos quia haec poena non diu tibi durabit, & statim sequetur gaudium sempiternum : post hoc fuit caput eius cultello praecisum. Militi vero praedicto fuit caput etiam cultello amputatum.	 	At that point a certain one of his soldiers, who was standing by, said as a comfort: be strong, since this punishment will not last long for you, and eternal joy will follow in short order; after this his head was cut off with a knife. Moreover the head of the aforementioned soldier was also cut off.
We also find in John of Plano Carpini's account an explanation of the origin of the term Horde applied to Batu's realm. The word derives from the Turkic term for the camps set up by the generals (Beazley, 1903, p.75).

Chapter	 	Latin	 	English
3	 	Vnde cum ante ordam essemus (sic enim apud eos stationes Imperatoris & Principum appellantur) prae venti magnitudine in terra prostrati iacebamus, & videre propter pulueris magnitudine minime poteramus.	 	Whence, as we stood before the Orda (for such is their name for the camps of the Emperor and of the Princes), we were cast prostrate on the ground through the force of the wind, and we were hardly able to see on account of the quantity of dust.
On their journey, the clergyman's retinue passed through Kiev itself, shortly after it had tried to withstand the Tartar onslaught. The account makes clear the wretched state of the remnants of the once great city (Beazley, 1903, p.87).

Chapter	 	Latin	 	English
15	 	Quo facto, contra Russiam perrexerunt, & magnam stragem in ea fecerunt, ciuitates & castra destruxerunt, & homines occiderunt. Kiouiam, Russiae metropolin, diu obsederunt, & tandem ceperunt, ac ciues interfecerunt.	 	And after this had passed, they overran Russia, and wreaked great havoc in it, destroyed the cities and camps, and killed the inhabitants. They long laid siege to Kiev, a metropolis of Russia, and finally they took it and killed off its citizens.
 	 	Vnde quando per illam terram ibamus, innumerabilia capita & ossa hominum mortuorum, iacentia super campum, inueniebamus. Fuerat enim vrbs valde magna & populosa, nunc quasi ad nihilum est redacta: vix enim domus ibi remanserunt ducente, quarum etiam habitatores tenentur in maxima seruitute.	 	Whence, as we travelled through that land, we encountered the innumerable heads and bones of dead men, strewn throughout the field. For it had been an exceedingly great and populous city, but now it had been reduced to next to nothing: for hardly remained in that place two hundred houses, whose inhabitants were held in the strictest servitude.
Finally John of Plano Carpini's account provides a window into the utter destruction of the once formidable Russian fighting force. The retinue's general disregard for danger amongst the Russians speaks to how profoundly the populace had been subjugated and how severely the warlike spirit had been wounded. In this passage the term "Ruthenians" seems to refer to "Russians" (Beazley, 1903, p.92).

Chapter	 	Latin	 	English
19	 	Ibamus tamen in periculo capitis semper propter Lituanos, qui saepe faciebant insultum super terram Russiae, & in illis maxime locis, per quos debebamus transire. At per praedictum seruientem eramus securi a Ruthenis, quorum etiam maxima pars occisa vel captiuata erat Tartaris.	 	Nevertheless we traveled in continual fear for our lives on account of the Lithuanians, who frequently made incursions into the land of Russia, and particularly in those places through which we were supposed to pass. But according to the aforementioned servant we were safe from the Ruthenians [Russians], the major part of whom had been killed or captured by the Tartars.
Reading and Textual Analysis
We now turn to the story of the first saints canonized in the East Slavic Christian tradition, Boris and Gleb. Sons of Vladimir, their siblings include the princes Svjatopolk and Jaroslav. As the story is told, Svjatopolk's ambition consumes him and, upon the death of their father, he plots to assassinate his brothers Boris and Gleb and usurp their realms. We join the narrative as Svjatopolk's henchmen come upon Boris and his attendants and strike the prince a deadly blow.

A small portion of the text has been omitted between lines 7 and 8.

1 - И ту же и проньзоша.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
ту -- adverb; <тѹ> there; then -- then
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- him
проньзоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <проньзнѫти, -нѫ, -неши> pierce, pierce through, transfix -- they stabbed

2 - И яко бысть ураненъ, и искочи изъ шатьра въ оторопѣ.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
бысть -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- he had been
ураненъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹранити, -нѭ, -ниши> pierce, pierce through, run through; stab, wound; harm -- wounded # Not to be confused with the homonymous verb ѹранити 'hasten; wake early'.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
искочи -- 3rd person singular aorist of; <искочити, -чѫ, -чиши> leap up, leap out, start -- he emerged
изъ -- preposition; <из> (w. gen.) from, out of -- from
шатьра -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <шатьръ> tabernacle, tent -- the tent
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
оторопѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <оторопъ> hurry, haste -- haste

3 - И начаша глаголати стояще округъ его, "чьто стоите зьряще?
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
начаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- they began
глаголати -- verb; infinitive of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- to speak
стояще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <стоꙗти, стоѭ, стоиши> stand, stay in place -- standing
округъ -- preposition; <окрѫгъ> (adv., prep. w. gen.) around, near -- round
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- him
чьто -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- What
стоите -- verb; 2nd person plural present of <стоꙗти, стоѭ, стоиши> stand, stay in place -- are you standing (there)
зьряще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <зрѣти, -зрѫ, -зриши> look at, behold; see -- looking at

4 - Приступивъше, сконьчаимъ повелѣное намъ."
 Collapse All
Приступивъше -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <пристѫпити, -пл҄ѭ, -пиши> come up to, step up -- Having stepped forward
сконьчаимъ -- verb; 1st person plural imperative of <съконьчати, -чаѭ, -чѥши> complete, end, fulfill -- let us complete
повелѣное -- participle used as substantive; neuter accusative singular of <повєлѣти, -лѭ, -лиши> give a command, command -- what was commanded
намъ -- pronoun; dative plural of <азъ> I -- to us

5 - Си слышавъ, блаженыи начатъ молитися и милъ ся имъ дѣяти, глаголя, "Братꙇя моя милая и любимая!
 Collapse All
Си -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
слышавъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- Having heard
блаженыи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- the blessed one
начатъ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- began
молитися -- verb; infinitive of <молити, -лѭ, -лиши> beseech, ask; pray + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- to pray
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
милъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- humble
ся -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- himself
имъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- before them
дѣяти -- verb; infinitive of <дѣꙗти, дѣѭ, дѣѥши> do, commit -- to...
глаголя -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- saying
Братꙇя -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers # Nominative singular used as vocative. For instances of the proper vocative form, see later uses in this text. The noun is collective, so that the singular is used even though the noun references several individuals.
моя -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- My
милая -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- poor
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
любимая -- passive participle; feminine nominative singular of <любити, -блѭ, -биши> love -- dear

6 - Мало ми время отдаите, да понѣ помолюся богу моему."
 Collapse All
Мало -- adjective; neuter accusative singular of <малъ> small, young -- a little
ми -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- me
время -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <врѣмѧ> time -- time
отдаите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <отъдаꙗти, -даѭ, -даѥши> donate, give, give as a give; give in exchange, give in return -- Give
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- that
понѣ -- adverb; <понѣ> or, whether, or then; save, at least, anyhow -- at least
помолюся -- verb; 1st person singular present of <помолити, -лѭ, -лиши> beseech, ask; pray + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- I might pray
богу -- noun; masculine dative singular of <богъ> god -- to... God
моему -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

7 - И възьрѣвъ на небо съ сльзами и горцѣ въздъхнувъ, начатъ молитися сицими глаголы...

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
възьрѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <възрѣти, -зрѫ, -зриши> look closely at, gaze at; look up at (w. prep.) -- having looked
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- toward
небо -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <нєбо> heaven, sky -- heaven
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
сльзами -- noun; feminine instrumental plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- tears
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
горцѣ -- adverb; neuter locative singular of <горькъ> bitter, pungent, unpleasant -- bitterly
въздъхнувъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <въздъхнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> groan, sigh -- having groaned
начатъ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- he began
молитися -- verb; infinitive of <молити, -лѭ, -лиши> beseech, ask; pray + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- to pray
сицими -- demonstrative adjective; masculine instrumental plural of <сиць, сицє, сица> such, like this -- with the following
глаголы -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <глаголъ> word, speech -- words

8 - Таче, възьрѣвъ къ нимъ умиленама очима и спадъшемь лицьмь, и вьсь сльзами облꙇявъся, рече, "Братꙇе, приступивъше, сконьчаите служьбу вашю, и буди миръ брату моему и вамъ, братꙇе."

 Collapse All
Таче -- adverb; <тачє> then -- Then
възьрѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <възрѣти, -зрѫ, -зриши> look closely at, gaze at; look up at (w. prep.) -- having looked
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
нимъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- them
умиленама -- adjective; feminine instrumental dual of <ѹмил҄єнъ> dejected, abject -- with downcast # Note usage of feminine form of the adjective with the noun око, typically neuter.
очима -- noun; neuter instrumental dual of <око> eye -- eyes # Note the shift from the normal *s-stem очєс- to the stem ок-, here palatalized due to the ending. This particular form seems to be adopted from the *i-declension, and the agreement with the adjective suggests the grammatical gender has also shifted to feminine.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
спадъшемь -- past passive participle; neuter instrumental singular of <съпасти, -дѫ, -дєши> fall; fall together -- a fallen
лицьмь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <лицє> face, form -- face
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
вьсь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
сльзами -- noun; feminine instrumental plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- with tears
облꙇявъся -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <облиꙗти, -лѣѭ, -лѣѥши> pour over -- covered
рече -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- he said
Братꙇе -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- Brothers
приступивъше -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <пристѫпити, -пл҄ѭ, -пиши> come up to, step up -- having stepped forward
сконьчаите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <съконьчати, -чаѭ, -чѥши> complete, end, fulfill -- complete
служьбу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <слѹжьба> service, forced service, slavery; liturgy; ministry -- duty
вашю -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
буди -- verb; 3rd person singular imperative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- let there be
миръ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <миръ> world; peace -- peace
брату -- noun; masculine dative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- to... brother
моему -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
вамъ -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- to you
братꙇе -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers

9 - Да елико слышаху словеса его, отъ сльзъ не можааху ни словесе рещи, отъ страха же и печали горькы и мъногыхъ сльзъ, нъ съ въздыханꙇемь горькымь жалостьно плакаахуся и къжьдо въ души своеи глаголааше, "Увы мнѣ, къняже нашь милыи и драгыи и блаженыи, водителю слѣпыимъ, одеже нагымъ, старости жьзле, казателю не наказанымъ!
 Collapse All
Да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- And as
елико -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <ѥликъ> how much, how many; as much, as many -- soon as
слышаху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- they heard
словеса -- noun; neuter accusative plural of <слово> word -- words
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- as a result of
сльзъ -- noun; feminine genitive plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- (their) tears
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
можааху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <мошти, могѫ, можєши> be able, can -- could
ни -- conjunction; <ни> and not, nor, no; (repeated) neither... nor -- even
словесе -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <слово> word -- a word
рещи -- verb; infinitive of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- say
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- of
страха -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <страхъ> shaking; terror -- (their) trembling
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- and
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
печали -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <пєчаль> sadness, affliction -- sadness
горькы -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <горькъ> bitter, pungent, unpleasant -- bitter
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
мъногыхъ -- adjective; feminine genitive plural of <мъногъ> much, many -- great (quantities of)
сльзъ -- noun; feminine genitive plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- tears
нъ -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
въздыханꙇемь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <въздꙑханьѥ> respiration, breathing; sigh, groan -- wailing
горькымь -- adjective; neuter instrumental singular of <горькъ> bitter, pungent, unpleasant -- bitter
жалостьно -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <жалостьнъ> sad -- pitifully
плакаахуся -- verb; 1st person singular imperfect of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- they wept
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
къжьдо -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <къждо> every, everyone -- each
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
души -- noun; feminine locative singular of <дѹша> soul -- soul
своеи -- adjective; feminine locative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
глаголааше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- was saying
Увы -- interjection; <ѹвꙑ> (w. dat.) alas, woe -- Woe
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me
къняже -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
нашь -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <нашь> our, of us -- our
милыи -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- pitiable
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
драгыи -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <драгъ> dear, precious -- dear
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
блаженыи -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- blessed
водителю -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <водитєль> leader, commander -- leader
слѣпыимъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <слѣпъ> blind -- to the blind
одеже -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <одєжда> garment, clothing, clothes -- clothing
нагымъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <нагъ> naked -- to the naked
старости -- noun; feminine dative singular of <старость> old age -- for old age
жьзле -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <жьзлъ> staff, walking stick -- walking stick
казателю -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <казатєль> corrector, reprover -- instructor
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- un-
наказанымъ -- participle used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <наказати, -заѭ, -заѥши> chastise; instruct; admonish, warn -- to the...-instructed

10 - Кто уже си вься исправить?
 Collapse All
Кто -- interrogative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <къто> who -- Who
уже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- ...
си -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- these things
вься -- adjective; neuter accusative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
исправить -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <исправити, -вл҄ѭ, -виши> accomplish -- will carry out

11 - Како не въсхотѣ славы мꙇра сего, како не въсхотѣ веселитися съ чьстьныими вельможами, како не въсхотѣ величꙇя, еже въ житꙇи семь.
 Collapse All
Како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- Oh how
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
въсхотѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въсхотѣти, -хоштѫ, -хоштєши> want, wish, desire -- he wanted
славы -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <слава> fame, glory -- the glory
мꙇра -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <миръ> world; peace -- world
сего -- demonstrative adjective; masculine genitive singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- of this
како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- How
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
въсхотѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въсхотѣти, -хоштѫ, -хоштєши> want, wish, desire -- he wanted
веселитися -- verb; infinitive of <вєсєлити, -л҄ѭ, -лиши> entertain; (refl.) rejoice + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- to be merry
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
чьстьныими -- adjective; masculine instrumental plural of <чиштьнъ> venerable; valuable -- the venerable
вельможами -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <вєльможа> member of the nobility, member of the aristocracy, noble, aristocrat -- aristocrats
како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- How
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
въсхотѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въсхотѣти, -хоштѫ, -хоштєши> want, wish, desire -- he wanted
величꙇя -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <вєличьѥ> greatness, pride -- the greatness
еже -- relative pronoun; neuter nominative singular of <ижє> who, which -- which (was)
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
житꙇи -- noun; neuter locative singular of <житьѥ> life -- life
семь -- demonstrative adjective; neuter locative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this

12 - Кто не почюдиться великууму его съмѣренꙇю, кто ли не съмѣриться, оного съмѣрєнꙇе видя и слыша?"

 Collapse All
Кто -- interrogative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <къто> who -- Who
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
почюдиться -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <почѹдити сѧ, -ждѫ сѧ, -диши сѧ> marvel at, wonder + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- does... marvel
великууму -- adjective; neuter dative singular of <вєликъ> big, large, great -- great
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
съмѣренꙇю -- noun; neuter dative singular of <съмѣр҄єньѥ> humility; retinue -- humility
кто -- interrogative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <къто> who -- Who
ли -- adverb; <ли> or; whether -- ...
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
съмѣриться -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <съмѣрити, -рѭ, -риши> lower, reduce, lessen, humble, abase + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- is... humbled
оного -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- that one's
съмѣрєнꙇе -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <съмѣр҄єньѥ> humility; retinue -- humility
видя -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <видѣти, виждѫ, видиши> see -- seeing
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
слыша -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <слꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear -- hearing

13 - И абꙇе усъпе, предавъ душю свою въ руцѣ бога жива, мѣсяца ꙇулꙇя въ 24 день, преже 9 каландъ августа.

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
абꙇе -- adverb; <абьє> right away -- immediately
усъпе -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹсънѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> fall asleep -- he died
предавъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <прѣдати, -дамь, -даси> hand over, commend -- having conferred
душю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дѹша> soul -- soul
свою -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- into
руцѣ -- noun; feminine accusative dual of <рѫка> hand -- the hands
бога -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <богъ> god -- the... God
жива -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <живъ> alive, living -- living
мѣсяца -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <мѣсѧць> moon, month -- of the month
ꙇулꙇя -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <июлии, июль> (the month of) July -- July
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- on
24 -- number adjective; masculine accusative singular of <дъвадєсѧтьнъ и чєтврътъ> twenty-fourth, 24th -- the 24th
день -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <дьнь> day -- day
преже -- adverb; <прѣждє> before -- before
9 -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <дєвятꙑи> ninth, 9th -- the 9th (day)
каландъ -- noun; masculine genitive plural of <каланъди> (plural) calends, kalends, first day of the month -- the calends # The phrasing mimics the Roman system of marking dates. The system recognizes three basic reference points in each month: the Calends or Kalends (the first day of each month), the Ides (the 15th day of March, May, July, and October; the 13th day of other months), and the Nones (the 9th day before the Ides). Dates are given by the number of days before or after these reference points. It is important to keep in mind that intervals are counted inclusively, so that both the start- and end-point of an interval are included. In the present instance, the Calends of August is Aug. 1. If we naively count back 9 days from this date, we arrive at July 23; but this only includes one endpoint, namely the day on which we stop. If we count back 9 days from Aug. 1 including the start-point Aug. 1 itself, we arrive at July 24, as stated in the text. Moreover, the placement of the word прѣждє 'before' is also traditional and emulative of the Latin (which also uses a traditional and apparently awkward construction). прѣждє 'before' is best taken as an adverb, rather than a preposition, since the phrase it seems to govern in English is not that which appears immediately afterward in Old Russian or Latin. English phrasing that might capture more faithfully the spirit and grammar of the Old Russian and Latin would be the following: 'the 9th day earlier, (reckoned from) the calends of August'.
августа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <авъгѹстъ> Augustus; (the month of) August -- of August

14 - Избиша же и отрокы многы.
 Collapse All
Избиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <избити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- they... killed
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- also
отрокы -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <отрокъ> boy, servant -- servants
многы -- adjective; masculine accusative plural of <мъногъ> much, many -- many

15 - Съ Гєоргꙇя же не могуще съняти гривьны и отсѣкъше главу, отъвьргоша и кромѣ; да тѣмь и послѣдь не могоша познати тѣла его.

 Collapse All
Съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- from
Гєоргꙇя -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Гюрги> Georgias, George -- George
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- ...
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- un-
могуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <мошти, могѫ, можєши> be able, can -- -able
съняти -- verb; infinitive of <сънѧти, съньмѫ, съньмєши> take away from, remove; go down, descend; lead down; (refl.) come together, collect, gather -- to remove
гривьны -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <гривьна> collar, necklace -- the necklace
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
отсѣкъше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <отъсѣкнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> cut off -- having cut off
главу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <глава> head; chapter -- (his) head
отъвьргоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <отъврѣшти, -врьгѫ, -врьгєши> throw away, renounce -- they cast
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- him
кромѣ -- adverb; <кромѣ> (adv., prep. w. gen.) outside, far away, on the side, against -- aside
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- so that
тѣмь -- adverb; neuter instrumental singular of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- then
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
послѣдь -- adverb; <послѣдь> then, afterward -- after
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
могоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <мошти, могѫ, можєши> be able, can -- they could
познати -- verb; infinitive of <познати, -аѭ, -аѥши> know -- identify
тѣла -- noun; neuter genitive singular <тѣло> body -- body # Note that this noun is originally an *s-stem, but here it shows the influence of the twofold, *o-stem declension.
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his

16 - Блаженааго же Бориса обьртѣвъше въ шатьръ, възложивъше на кола, повезоша.
 Collapse All
Блаженааго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- the blessed
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
Бориса -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Борисъ> Boris (name of a prince, brother of Svjatopolk, Jaroslav, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Boris
обьртѣвъше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <обрътѣти, -штѫ, -тиши> wrap up, envelop, involve; return -- having wrapped
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
шатьръ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <шатьръ> tabernacle, tent -- the tent
възложивъше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <възложити, -жѫ, -жиши> throw upon, cast upon; impose -- (and) having laid (him)
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- upon
кола -- noun; neuter accusative plural of <кола, колєсє> wheel -- wheels # Here the plural likely to be taken as connoting a cart.
повезоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <повєсти, -зѫ, -зєши> tow, drag -- they towed (him)

17 - И яко быша на бору, начать въскланяти святую главу свою.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
быша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- they came
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- upon
бору -- noun; masculine locative singular of <борьѥ> (usu. collective) pine; cypress; cedar; (any) tree; woods, forest -- the forest
начать -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- he began
въскланяти -- verb; infinitive of <въскланꙗти, -нꙗѭ, -нꙗѥши> recline; emerge, bring forth, raise up -- to raise up
святую -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <свѧтъ> holy, blessed -- holy
главу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <глава> head; chapter -- head
свою -- adjective; feminine accusative singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- his

18 - И се увѣдѣвъ Святопълкъ, пославъ два варяга и прободоста и мечьмь въ сьрдце.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
увѣдѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹвѣдѣти, -вѣмь, -вѣси> see; know, understand -- having seen
Святопълкъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Свѧтоплъкъ> Svjatopolk, Svyatopolk, Sviatopolk (name of a prince, brother of Jaroslav, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Svjatopolk
пославъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
два -- number adjective; masculine accusative dual of <дъва, дъвѣ> two -- two
варяга -- adjective used as substantive; masculine accusative dual of <варѧгъ> Varangian, of the Varangian tribe (name of a particular group of Scandinavians); bodyguard (of Viking descent, often applied to members of the Byzantine Emperor's personal guard) -- Varangians
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
прободоста -- verb; 3rd person dual aorist of <пробости, -дѫ, -дєши> wound, injure -- they stabbed
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- him
мечьмь -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <мєчь> sword -- with a sword
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- through
сьрдце -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <срьдьцє> heart -- the heart

19 - И тако съконьчасꙗ и въспрꙇꙗтъ неувꙗдаемыи вѣньць.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
тако -- adverb; <тако> thus, in this way -- in this way
съконьчасꙗ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <съконьчати, -чаѭ, -чѥши> complete, end, fulfill + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- he was finished
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
въспрꙇꙗтъ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въсприѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take up, receive -- he received
неувꙗдаемыи -- adjective; masculine accusative singular of <нєѹвѧдаѥмъ> unfading -- the unfading
вѣньць -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <вѣньць> crown, diadem -- crown

20 - И положиша тѣло его, принесъше Вышегороду, у цьркве святааго Василꙇя въ зємли погребоша.

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
положиша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <положити, -жѫ, -жиши> lay down, set down -- they placed
тѣло -- noun; neuter accusative singular <тѣло> body -- body
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
принесъше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <принєсти, -сѫ, -сєши> bring, carry -- having carried (it)
Вышегороду -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Вꙑшєградъ> citadel, castle; (as proper name) Vyshegrad, Vyshgorod (name of a city) -- to Vyshgorod
у -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- near
цьркве -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <црькꙑ> church, temple -- the church
святааго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свѧтъ> holy, blessed -- of St.
Василꙇя -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Василий> Vasili, Vasilii, Vasilij, Basil (name of a saint) -- Basil
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
зємли -- noun; feminine locative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the ground
погребоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <погрєти, -грєбѫ, -грєбєши> bury -- (and) they buried (it)

Lesson Text
1 - И ту же и проньзоша. 2 - И яко бысть ураненъ, и искочи изъ шатьра въ оторопѣ. 3 - И начаша глаголати стояще округъ его, "чьто стоите зьряще? 4 - Приступивъше, сконьчаимъ повелѣное намъ." 5 - Си слышавъ, блаженыи начатъ молитися и милъ ся имъ дѣяти, глаголя, "Братꙇя моя милая и любимая! 6 - Мало ми время отдаите, да понѣ помолюся богу моему." 7 - И възьрѣвъ на небо съ сльзами и горцѣ въздъхнувъ, начатъ молитися сицими глаголы...

8 - Таче, възьрѣвъ къ нимъ умиленама очима и спадъшемь лицьмь, и вьсь сльзами облꙇявъся, рече, "Братꙇе, приступивъше, сконьчаите служьбу вашю, и буди миръ брату моему и вамъ, братꙇе."

9 - Да елико слышаху словеса его, отъ сльзъ не можааху ни словесе рещи, отъ страха же и печали горькы и мъногыхъ сльзъ, нъ съ въздыханꙇемь горькымь жалостьно плакаахуся и къжьдо въ души своеи глаголааше, "Увы мнѣ, къняже нашь милыи и драгыи и блаженыи, водителю слѣпыимъ, одеже нагымъ, старости жьзле, казателю не наказанымъ! 10 - Кто уже си вься исправить? 11 - Како не въсхотѣ славы мꙇра сего, како не въсхотѣ веселитися съ чьстьныими вельможами, како не въсхотѣ величꙇя, еже въ житꙇи семь. 12 - Кто не почюдиться великууму его съмѣренꙇю, кто ли не съмѣриться, оного съмѣрєнꙇе видя и слыша?"

13 - И абꙇе усъпе, предавъ душю свою въ руцѣ бога жива, мѣсяца ꙇулꙇя въ 24 день, преже 9 каландъ августа.

14 - Избиша же и отрокы многы. 15 - Съ Гєоргꙇя же не могуще съняти гривьны и отсѣкъше главу, отъвьргоша и кромѣ; да тѣмь и послѣдь не могоша познати тѣла его.

16 - Блаженааго же Бориса обьртѣвъше въ шатьръ, възложивъше на кола, повезоша. 17 - И яко быша на бору, начать въскланяти святую главу свою. 18 - И се увѣдѣвъ Святопълкъ, пославъ два варяга и прободоста и мечьмь въ сьрдце. 19 - И тако съконьчасꙗ и въспрꙇꙗтъ неувꙗдаемыи вѣньць. 20 - И положиша тѣло его, принесъше Вышегороду, у цьркве святааго Василꙇя въ зємли погребоша.

Translation
1 And then they stabbed him. 2 And as he had been wounded, he emerged from the tent in haste. 3 And they began to speak, standing round him, "What are you standing (there) looking at? 4 Having stepped forward, let us complete what was commanded to us." 5 Having heard this, the blessed one began to pray and to humble himself before them, saying, "My poor and dear brothers! 6 Give me just a little time, that I might at least pray to my God." 7 And having looked toward heaven with tears and having groaned bitterly, he began to pray with the following words...
8 Then, having looked to them with downcast eyes and with a fallen face and all covered with tears, he said: "Brothers, having stepped forward, complete your duty, and let there be peace to my brother and to you, brothers."
9 And as soon as they heard his words, they could not even say a word as a result of their tears, and of their trembling and bitter sadness and great quantities of tears, but with bitter wailing they wept pitifully and each was saying in his soul, "Woe to me, our pitiable and dear and blessed prince, leader to the blind, clothing to the naked, walking stick for old age, instructor to the uninstructed! 10 Who will carry out all these things? 11 Oh how he wanted not the glory of this world! How he wanted not to be merry with the venerable aristocrats! How he wanted not the greatness which was in this life! 12 Who does not marvel at his great humility? Who is not humbled, seeing and hearing that one's humility?"
13 And immediately he died, having conferred his soul into the hands of the living God, on the 24th day of the month of July, the 9th day before the calends of August.
14 And they also killed many servants. 15 Unable to remove the necklace from George and having cut off his head, they cast him aside, so that then and after they could not identify his body.
16 And having wrapped the blessed Boris in the tent, and having laid him upon wheels, they towed (him). 17 And as they came upon the forest, he began to raise up his holy head. 18 And Svjatopolk, having seen this, sent two Varangians and they stabbed him with a sword through the heart. 19 And in this way he was finished, and he received the unfading crown. 20 And they placed his body, having carried (it) to Vyshegorod, (and) they buried it in the ground near the church of St. Basil.
Grammar
36 The Verbal Noun
Old Russian shares with Old Church Slavonic a particular formation of an abstract verbal noun or verbal substantive. This noun represents the abstract action denoted by the verbal root to which it is constructed. In this sense it parallels the formation of the English gerund by means of the suffix -ing. For example, from the root know we build an abstract noun, knowing, by adding the suffix, and the resulting noun denotes the action represented by the root in its most abstract sense: Knowing is half the battle.

This particular abstract noun derives from the past passive participle of a given verb. Specifically, given the past passive participle stem, one further adds the ending -ьѥ [-ĭje] to form a soft neuter noun representing the action. For example, the verb знати 'to know' shows past passive participle знанъ 'known'. The abstract verbal noun then becomes знаньѥ 'knowing', i.e. 'knowledge'. Moreover intransitive verbs, which generally do not exhibit past passive participles, nevertheless frequently show verbal nouns constructed by the same formal procedure. For example, въскрьснути 'to rise from the dead' has verbal abstract въскрьсєньѥ or въскрьсновєньѥ 'rising from the dead, resurrection'. In those situations in which the the verb displays multiple past passive participle formations, verbal nouns may be built from each, frequently with a slightly different meaning for each formation. The chart below lists further examples.

Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	Past Pass. Part.	 	Verbal Noun	 	Meaning
зачяти	 	take up	 	зачятъ	 	зачятьѥ	 	conception
забыти	 	forget	 	забъвєнъ	 	забъвєньѥ	 	forgetting
 	 	 	 	забытъ	 	забытьѥ	 	forgetting
видѣти	 	see	 	видѣнъ	 	видѣньѥ	 	sight
помышл҄ати	 	think	 	помышл҄єнъ	 	помышл҄єньѥ	 	thought
пропяти	 	crucify	 	пропятъ	 	пропятьѥ	 	crucifixion
стати	 	stand	 	 	 	станьѥ	 	standing
37 The Third Conjugation
The third conjugation comprises those verbs which, from a historical perspective, show *-je/jo- appended to the verbal root in the present tense. That is, the thematic vowel familiar from the first and second conjugations is immediately preceded by the glide *-j-. In this sense, little is new when compared with the first conjugation: we find the remnants of the *o-theme in the the first person singular and third person plural, and the *e-theme appears elsewhere. The difference consists simply in the preceding glide, *-j-. This however has a dramatic effect on the appearance of some verbal paradigms because this glide will trigger j-palatalization of the immediately preceding consonant (cf. Section 6.4). As an example, compare the present tense paradigms of мєт-а-ти 'to throw' in both Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic.

 	 	CS	 	Old Russian	 	OCS
1 Sg.	 	*met-j-ǫ	 	мєчу	 	мєштѫ
2	 	*met-j-eši	 	мєчєши	 	мєштєши
3	 	*met-j-etĭ	 	мєчєть	 	мєштєтъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	*met-j-evě	 	мєчєвѣ	 	мєштєвѣ
2	 	*met-j-eta	 	мєчєта	 	мєштєта
3	 	*met-j-ete	 	мєчєта	 	мєштєтє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	*met-j-emŭ	 	мєчємъ	 	мєштємъ
2	 	*met-j-ete	 	мєчєтє	 	мєштєтє
3	 	*met-j-ǫtĭ	 	мєчуть	 	мєштѫтъ
The verbs of the third conjugation fall into three basic subcategories, based largely on the shape of the infinitive:

Class IIIA: these verbs append the infinitive suffix -ти directly to the verbal root, with no intervening suffix. Example: пити 'to drink', with present stem пи- [pĭj-]. The verb знати 'to know' also belongs to this subclass: the final -а of the stem зна- [znaj-] belongs to the root and is not to be confused with the suffix appearing in other subclasses.
Class IIIB: these verbs exhibit a suffix -а- which precedes the infinitive suffix -ти, but which does not appear in the present stem. In particular, this class includes a number of verbs with a suffix -у- followed by the glide -j-. Before the suffix -а- of the infinitive stem the -у- appears as -ов-. Example: каз-а-ти 'to say', with present stem каж- (from *kaz-j-) as in кажєть 'he says'; ков-а-ти 'to forge', with present tense stem ку- [kuj-].
Class IIIC: these verbs exhibit either the suffix -а- or -ѣ- which precedes the infinitive suffix -ти, and which also appears as part of the present tense stem. Example: дѣл-а-ти 'to work', with present stem дѣла- [dělaj-] as in дѣлаѥть 'he works'.
The following table lists some verbs of each subclass, along with the forms from the present tense and the suffixed stem derived from the infinitive.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	1st Sg.	 	2nd Sg.	 	Pres. Stem	 	Suffixed Stem
IIIA	 	бити	 	beat	 	бью	 	бьѥши	 	[bĭj-]	 	 
IIIA	 	знати	 	know	 	знаю	 	знаѥши	 	[znaj-]	 	 
IIIA	 	крыти	 	cover	 	крыю	 	крыѥши	 	[kryj-]	 	 
IIIA	 	молоти	 	mill	 	мєл҄ю	 	мєл҄ѥши	 	[melj-]	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
IIIB	 	имати	 	take	 	ємл҄ю	 	ємл҄ѥши	 	[emlj-]	 	им-а-
IIIB	 	купати	 	bathe	 	купл҄ю	 	купл҄ѥши	 	[kuplj-]	 	куп-а-
IIIB	 	плакати	 	weep	 	плачу	 	плачєши	 	[plač-]	 	плак-а-
IIIB	 	пьсати	 	write	 	пьшу	 	пьшєши	 	[pĭš-]	 	пьс-а-
IIIB	 	совати	 	throw	 	сую	 	суѥши	 	[suj-]	 	сов-а-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
IIIC	 	дѣлати	 	work	 	дѣлаю	 	дѣлаѥши	 	[dělaj-]	 	дѣл-а-
IIIC	 	раз-умѣти	 	understand	 	раз-умѣю	 	раз-умѣѥши	 	[raz-uměj-]	 	раз-ум-ѣ-
Note that we often find forms such as знаѥть 'he knows' written without the iotated ligature ѥ: знаєть. The palatal glide between vowels is left implicit.

The table below lists example paradigms of verbs from the respective subcategories. The verbs колоти (клати) 'to split' and знати 'to know' illustrate the forms of verbs of Class IIIA. The verb глаголати 'to say' illustrates the forms of verbs belonging to Class IIIB, while умѣти 'to understand' illustrates those of Class IIIC.

Class III	 	IIIA	 	IIIA	 	IIIB	 	IIIC
Stem	 	зна-	 	кол҄-	 	глагол҄-	 	умѣ-
Present	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	знаю	 	кол҄ю	 	глагол҄ю	 	умѣю
2	 	знаѥши	 	кол҄єши	 	глагол҄єши	 	умѣѥши
3	 	знаѥть	 	кол҄єть	 	глагол҄єть	 	умѣѥть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	знаѥвѣ	 	кол҄євѣ	 	глагол҄євѣ	 	умѣѥвѣ
2	 	знаѥта	 	кол҄єта	 	глагол҄єта	 	умѣѥта
3	 	знаѥта	 	кол҄єта	 	глагол҄єта	 	умѣѥта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	знаѥмъ	 	кол҄ємъ	 	глагол҄ємъ	 	умѣѥмъ
2	 	знаѥтє	 	кол҄єтє	 	глагол҄єтє	 	умѣѥтє
3	 	знають	 	кол҄ють	 	глагол҄ють	 	умѣють
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	знаи	 	кол҄и	 	глагол҄и	 	умѣи
3	 	знаи	 	кол҄и	 	глагол҄и	 	умѣи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	знаивѣ	 	кол҄ивѣ	 	глагол҄ивѣ	 	умѣивѣ
2	 	знаита	 	кол҄ита	 	глагол҄ита	 	умѣита
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	знаимъ	 	кол҄имъ	 	глагол҄имъ	 	умѣимъ
2	 	знаитє	 	кол҄итє	 	глагол҄итє	 	умѣитє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	зная	 	кол҄я	 	глагол҄я	 	умѣя
Fem. N	 	знаючи	 	кол҄ючи	 	глагол҄ючи	 	умѣючи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	знаѥмъ	 	кол҄ємъ	 	глагол҄ємъ	 	умѣѥмъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	знаахъ	 	кол҄яахъ	 	глаголаахъ	 	умѣяхъ
2	 	знаашє	 	кол҄яашє	 	глаголаашє	 	умѣяшє
3	 	знаашє	 	кол҄яашє	 	глаголаашє	 	умѣяшє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	знааховѣ	 	кол҄яаховѣ	 	глаголааховѣ	 	умѣяховѣ
2	 	знаашєта	 	кол҄яашєта	 	глаголаашєта	 	умѣяшєта
3	 	знаашєта	 	кол҄яашєта	 	глаголаашєта	 	умѣяшєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	знаахомъ	 	кол҄яахомъ	 	глаголаахомъ	 	умѣяхомъ
2	 	знаашєтє	 	кол҄яашєтє	 	глаголаашєтє	 	умѣяшєтє
3	 	знааху	 	кол҄яаху	 	глаголааху	 	умѣяху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	знахъ	 	колохъ, клахъ	 	глаголахъ	 	умѣхъ
2	 	зна	 	коло, кла	 	глагола	 	умѣ
3	 	зна	 	коло, кла	 	глагола	 	умѣ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	знаховѣ	 	колоховѣ, клаховѣ	 	глаголаховѣ	 	умѣховѣ
2	 	знаста	 	колоста, класта	 	глаголаста	 	умѣста
3	 	знаста	 	колоста, класта	 	глаголаста	 	умѣста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	знахомъ	 	колохомъ, клахомъ	 	глаголахомъ	 	умѣхомъ
2	 	знастє	 	колостє, кластє	 	глаголастє	 	умѣстє
3	 	знаша	 	колоша, клаша	 	глаголаша	 	умѣша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	знавъ	 	коловъ, клавъ	 	глаголавъ	 	умѣвъ
Fem. N	 	знавъши	 	коловъши, клавъши	 	глаголавъши	 	умѣвъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	зналъ	 	кололъ, клалъ	 	глаголалъ	 	умѣлъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	знанъ	 	кол҄єнъ, клатъ	 	глаголанъ	 	умѣнъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	знати	 	колоти, клати	 	глаголати	 	умѣти
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	знатъ	 	колотъ, клатъ	 	глаголатъ	 	умѣтъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	знаньѥ	 	(рас)колєньѥ	 	глаголаньѥ	 	умѣньѥ
38 The Locative Case
The Old Russian locative case provides, in some sense, a box within which an event is situated. When the noun in the locative denotes physical space, it provides the place at, on, or within which the event being described takes places. When the noun in the locative denotes some unit of time, then it provides the time span within which, or the point of time at which, the event occurs. Consider the following examples of the locative of place at which or time within which.

бысть пожаръ великъ кыевѣ городѣ 'There was a great fire in the city Kiev' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
отъ нихъже суть Поляне Кыевѣ до сего дьне 'from among whom there are Polianians in Kiev to this day' (Primary Chronicle).
томь же лѣтѣ приде мстиславъ 'In that year Mstislav arrived' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
The locative also forms the complement of certain verbs. Consider the following examples.

жритва его облацѣх ся конєтъ 'His sacrifice touches the clouds' (cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 1, p. 1296).
пѹсыни... горахъ прилежаше высокыихъ 'A desert... lay in the high mountains' (cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 2, p. 1422).
Though the use of the locative is common and widespread in Old Russian, we already see a tendency for its use in conjuction with prepositions such as на 'in, into' or при 'at, near'. Generally the sense elicited by the prepositions coincides with the basic sense of the locative case itself denoting spatial or temporal location or position.

39 The Dative Case
The Old Russian dative case shows a dazzling variety of functions. Nearly all the functions, however, exhibit a common theme: reference. The dative generally serves to mark an entity with reference to which an event takes place. Frequently this notion of reference overlaps with the notion of the indirect object, as in English He gave the book to me. But the notion of reference may be more general: That doesn't bode well for me. Consider the following examples of the dative marking the indirect object.

рече дружинѣ своеи 'he said to his retinue' (Death of Igor).
сътворю тризну мужю моему 'I will perform a funeral for my husband' (Olga's Revenge).
дадите ми отъ двора по три голуби да по три воробиѣ 'Give me from (each) household three pigeons and three sparrows' (Olga's Revenge).
At times the dative can mark a point of reference with such close association as to overlap with the sense of the genitive. Compare the following example of the so-called dative of possession: единому имѧ кии, а другому щекъ, а третьєму хоривъ, сестра ихъ лꙑбедь 'To the first the name was Kii, but to the second Shchek, and to the third Khoriv, (and) their sister was Lybed' (Primary Chronicle). Note the use of the dative in demonstrating possession of the names of the individual brothers, but the possessive construction shifts to the genitive ихъ when referring to their sister.

However at times the use of dative marks an interested party, one with reference to whom the statement as a whole is valid. Such uses of the dative often form the complements to certain adjectives. The following statements provide examples of the dative of reference.

люба ми есть рѣчь вашь 'Your proposal is pleasing to me' (Olga's Revenge).
добра ли вы чьсть? 'Is the honor good (enough) for you?' (Olga's Revenge).
In some situations the use of the dative overlaps with that of the accusative in denoting the endpoint of directed motion. This parallels English usage of the preposition to, which can either denote the indirect object (Give it to me) or the destination (I'm going to the store). The following provide examples of the dative marking the goal of directed motion.

си же Ольга приде Киеву 'and this Olga came to Kiev' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex). Compare поиде ... Киевъ in the discussion of the accusative (Section 29).
но пришедъ Смолинску и поимъ вои 'but having come to Smolensk and having gathered troops' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
идѣте съ данию домови 'Go home with the tribute' (Death of Igor).
Moreover, the dative often forms the complement of certain verbs, where one might expect an accusative to mark a direct object. Consider the use of the dative with certain verbs in the following examples.

насилѧше имъ и мужи єго 'he and his men were oppressing them' (Igor's Death).
и повелѣ людьмъ съсути могылу велику 'And she ordered the people to heap up a great burial mound' (Olga's Revenge).
нє браните ѥмѹ 'Do not hinder him' (Ostromir Gospel, Mark 9.39, cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 1, p. 166).
39.1 The Dative with Infinitive
One important use of the dative in Old Russian occurs with the infinitive. In particular, where Old Russian employs an infinitive to denote an action, the subject of that infinitive (when not the same as the subject of the finite verb of the clause) typically appears in the dative. This parallels English usage of the preposition for: It's not easy for me to admit it. Here English employs the prepositional phrase for me to denote the subject of the action represented by the infinitive to admit. Old Russian employs the dative in a similar construction. Consider the following examples of the dative with infinitive construction.

... то видока ему нє искати, нъ платити ему продажю .г. гривнꙑ '... then (it is) not for him to produce a witness, but (it is) for him (the offender) to pay 3 grivnas' (Russian Truth [Russkaja Pravda]). Less strictly, '... then he need not produce a witness, but the other must pay 3 grivnas'.
тѣхъ бо пророци прорицаху яко Богу родитися 'For their prophets prophesied that God (was) to be born' (Primary Chronicle).
39.2 The Dative Absolute
Absolute constructions run rife through ancient Indo-European languages. The term absolute refers to the fact that such constructions generally have no grammatical relation to the surrounding material. Rather they serve to set the tone, so to speak: the absolute construction generally provides some attendant circumstances for the event described, or it elaborates some conditions necessary for the event to take place. Even English has its absolute constructions, made famous -- or infamous -- by the Second Amendment to the Constitution of the United States:

 	 	A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
The italicised section, a ... militia being necessary..., forms an absolute construction. Grammatically it bears no relation to the remainder of the sentence (after the comma). It nevertheless provides important information relevant to the interpretation of the remainder of the sentence, and thereby we understand the reason for their use: absolute constructions provide a means of adding extra information without adding an entire sentence.

The format for an absolute construction is rather formulaic: a noun plus an accompanying adjective form the nucleus of an absolute construction. Typically the adjective is a participle; when it is a bare adjective (i.e. not obviously derived from a verbal root), the reader generally supplies an appropriate participial form of the verb 'to be'. In the Second Amendment, we see that the nucleus is a... militia being necessary, i.e. a noun (militia), an accompanying adjective (necessary), and here an explicit participial form of 'to be' (being, the present participle). The remaining phrases of the italicized absolute above are, grammatically speaking, window-dressing: they add extra information to the absolute construction, but they are not essential to its structure.

As the Second Amendment shows, English just tacks the absolute construction on to the accompanying sentence. This is rather simple for English, which shows rather simplified case-marking when compared to Old Russian. But if we try to do the same in Old Russian, that is tack a noun and accompanying adjective or participle onto a sentence, we immediately confront a fundamental issue: what case should the noun and adjective be in? If they take the nominative case, they might be construed as the subject of the accompanying sentence, and so they would not be absolute (grammatically isolated from the remainder). If the accusative, they might be construed as the direct object. Almost any other case might work, and other Indo-European languages employ one or other of them in their own absolute constructions: Greek chooses the genitive (and the accusative at times!), Sanskrit the locative (and the genitive at times), Latin the ablative, Gothic the dative. Old Russian, like Gothic, places a noun and accompanying adjective in the dative for absolute constructions. Hence the terminology: the dative absolute.

When in doubt as to how to translate, a standard formula using the English preposition with often works. Supposing a nucleus consisting of the noun cookie and the adjective (past passive participle) eaten, we might render an absolute in English by means of the formula with the cookie eaten, or more explicitly with the cookie (having been) eaten. If the participle were the present passive, being eaten, then the corresponding absolute might be rendered with the cookie being eaten. From there one might add further refinements: with the cookie being eaten by my sister right this very instant.

The following selections provide examples of the dative absolute in Old Russian.

полем же жившемъ ѡсобѣ, и володѣющемъ и родꙑ своими иже и до сеє братьѣ бѧху полѧне 'with the Polianians living by themselves and ruling their own families, even up to this (time) brothers were the Polianians' (Primary Chronicle).
ѹбиѥнѹ жє глѣбови и повьржєнѹ на пѹстѣ мѣстѣ мѣжю дъвѣма колодама и господь нє оставлꙗѧи своихъ рабъ 'with Gleb having been struck down and having been cast into an open space between two tree trunks, the Lord (was) not deserting his servants' (Story of Boris and Gleb).
сущю самодрьжицю вьсеи русьскѣи земли Володимиру сыну Святославлю, вънуку же Игореву 'with Vladimir, son of Svjatoslav and grandson of Igor, being autocrat of the whole Russian land' (Boris & Gleb).
From the earliest periods, however, we find examples in which the structure of the dative absolute, as outlined above, begins to break down. We find that the participles fail to agree with the noun (in the dative) forming the nucleus of the absolute construction. Consider the following example: идуще же ємѹ въспѧть размꙑсливъ рече дрѹжинѣ своєи 'Having gone back (and) having considered he said to his retinue...' (Olga's Revenge).

The isolated participial forms that result in this way, which do not display agreement with their referents, comprise the raw material from which arises later the Russian gerund (cf. Section 46).

40 Negation
Old Russian possesses two basic negative particles: не and ни. To distinguish between them, we might characterize не as the basic negative adverb, similar in function to English not or Latin no:n. The particle ни, by contrast generally serves as a negative conjunction, similar to English neither or nor, or similar to Latin neque. Thus Old Russian не generally negates the item before which it stands, or the clause as a whole; ни, on the other hand, connects one clause to another, or one phrase to another, while negating the clause in which it stands or the element before which it stands. Such is the tendency though, as with most things, Old Russian allows for variation. The following excerpts provide examples of the coordination between не and ни.

не ѣдемъ на конихъ, ни пѣши идемъ, нъ понєсѣте ны въ лодии 'We will not ride on horses, nor will we go on foot, but carry us in a boat' (Olga's Revenge).
нынѣ у васъ нѣсть меду, ни скоры 'Among you now there is neither honey, nor fur(s)' (Olga's Revenge).
Between clauses and phrases, then, Old Russian employs ни. But within a clause or phrase Old Russian uses не. Within a larger clause containing both не and ни, the negative не generally occurs once, while ни may be repeated. Consider the following example of repeated ни with a single не: ни хытру ни горазду, ни птицю горазду суда божиа не минути '(It is) neither for the clever nor for the smart man, nor (even) for the smart bird to escape God's judgement' (Igor Tale).

In addition to its role as a negative conjunction, we also find ни employed as a prefix with certain indefinite pronouns or adverbs to create negative pronouns or adverbs. For example, whereas къто can be the interrogative 'who?' or the indefinite 'anyone', the prefixed form никъто has the sense 'no one'. Similarly: чьто 'what?' or 'anything', but ничьто 'nothing'; къде 'where?' or 'wherever', but никъде 'nowhere'. The same applies to interrogative adjectives such as кыи 'which?': thus никыи 'no, not a, not any'. When Old Russian employs such negative pronouns, adverbs, and adjectives, the clause as a whole may still contain не without double negation as in Standard English. Consider the following use of не with the ни-prefix: нє вѣдущю никому 'with no one knowing', i.e. 'unbeknownst to anyone' (Uspenskiji Sbornik). The two negatives reinforce one another, rather than cancelling each other out as in Standard English: e.g. with no one not knowing is equivalent to with everyone knowing in Standard English.

Moreover Old Russian may drop the negative не when the ни-prefix appears elswhere in the clause. The following example shows the use of the ни-prefix without не: никто же приходилъ къ нимъ 'nobody came to them' (Uspenskiji Sbornik).

Other sections in this series discuss in greater detail the switch from accusative to genitive marking of direct objects in the presence of negation (cf. Sections 15, 29, 34). However when the negation is clearly confined to one particular item or phrase, this may fail to trigger use of the genitive-accusative. Consider the following examples of negating a single item.

не язъ бо почалъ братью бити '(It was) not I (who) began to beat the brothers' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
то не сь то створи, но сын его '(It was) not he (who) did this, but his son' (Primary Chronicle, Laurentian Codex).
Finally we find a composite conjuction неже 'than'. This may clearly be analyzed as не же 'and not', and frequently it may be translated as such. This particle generally appears in the context of comparisons. Consider the following example of the use of неже 'than': лице жъ бы потяту быти неже полонену быти 'It would be better (for one) to be slain than to be captured' (Igor Tale). The conjunction неже here could easily be translated with 'and not': 'it is better... to be slain and not to be captured'. The past passive participles потяту 'slain' and полонену 'captured', here in the dative, agree with the implicit dative subject of the infinitives быти (cf. Section 39).

Old Russian Online
Lesson 9
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
V.iii A Changing of the Guard
The effects of the conquest by the Tartars were even more far-reaching than the destruction was widespread. This period of submission to the Mongols, the so-called Tartar Yoke, lasted for another two centuries, with a gradual decline in power over that period. The Qipchaq Khanate originally established by Batu was eventually conquered by the Crimean Tatars in 1502 (Ostrowski, 2009).

The same period of westward expansion for the Tartar invaders also saw eastward expansion for another European power: Lithuania. As the southwestern provinces of Galicia and Volhynia lay at the extremity of the Qipchaq Khanate, they were difficult for the Tartars to control, and ultimately they fell into the orbit of Lithuania. These polities comprised communities which may in large part be considered the forerunners of Belorussia and Ukraine, so that here we see a fork between the historical paths of development of these two political entities on the one hand, and Great Russia on the other.

Tartar imperial rule exploited the devolution of administrative responsibility. In particular the Qipchaq Khanate allowed regional Russian princes to administer their own realms, and it declared a single Grand Prince to rule over the others. This Grand Prince was initially located in Vladimir. The administrators of the khanate kept sons of the grand princes of the Rus as hostages to ensure loyalty. At the same time these sons learned first-hand the practice of governing the khanate (Ostrowski, 2009). As part of their patronage of the Russian principalities, the khans were expected to supply troops to the grand princes when the need arose. In return the Rus were expected to supply troops to the khan when called for. Conscription seems to have been based on census data, with the khan recruiting one in every ten males. The khan determined who would be the grand prince of the Russian principalities and issued patents (decrees) declaring the authority of princes, which they had to retrieve in person from the capital at Saray (Hingley, 2003; Ostrowski, 2009).

During the 14th century, the Tartars converted to Islam. Rather than engender conflict between Christian and Muslim clergies, the Tartars seem to have held a noteworthy tolerance for the Russian church. This tolerance manifested itself economically with an exemption from taxes for the clergy and monasteries. This in turn provided a privileged position from which the Church could cultivate its role as a spiritual and political unifier in a period of trial and tribulation for the Russian populace.

This twofold manifestation of influence wove itself deeply into the emerging fabric of Russian cultural and political identity. The political influence wielded by the Church was anything but hidden: the metropolitan St. Alexis served as the practical head of state under two successive Grand Princes of Moscow (Hingley, 2003). This fostered a growing identification among the populace of the Church with Russia itself (Andreyev, 1962). This popular embrace of the Church was at one and the same time necessitated by the turmoil brought by the Tartar invasion and fostered by the emergence of native-born saints. Among those dating to this period is St. Sergius of Radonezh, a prime example of the intertwining of Church and State during this period: "He is at once a monk and nature lover, gentle with his spiritual children and a lover of toil; he is the teacher and the inspirations of a whole pleiad of Russian ecclesiastical figures of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; but he is also the servant of the rising realm of Muscovy and takes his stand above the pettiness of local interests. He is simple and wise, a man of action and a mystic." (Andreyev, 1962) Though entreated by St. Alexis to become his successor as metropolitan, St. Sergius nevertheless refused and remained dedicated to his duties as monk.

Most portentous for the future development of Eastern Europe and Central Asia is the slow and steady rise, amidst this tumult, of the polity of Moscow. The city began as a rather insignificant satellite of greater powers of the northeast reaches of the Rus, such as Vladimir and Suzdal. Indeed, during this same period Tver too was a rising power and looked to eclipse Moscow. But several facts seem to have shifted events in Moscow's favor.

To begin, Alexander Nevsky, the prince of Novgorod, had already garnered fame for breaking the tide of the Tartar advance before it engulfed Novgorod. This he achieved largely through diplomacy. But he also added to his military renown by fighting off encroaching Teutonic armies invading from the west. Later he relocated to Vladimir. His son Daniel took the throne in Moscow in 1276, solidifying Moscow as the seat of one of the most powerful families in the lands of the Rus at that time. Moreover, in 1326 the Metropolitanate of the Russian Church shifted its seat to Moscow, where it remained thereafter (Hingley, 2003). Thus the two axes of power in the Russian lands coalesced in Moscow.

All of this took place, however, under the auspices of Tartar administration. This shift of power, therefore, would not have taken place had it not been, at some level, sanctioned by the khanate administration. And we in fact see that the khanate did slowly shift the balance of power in Moscow's favor. Though the reason for this inclination is not entirely clear, a likely explanation stems from the idea that the Mongol administration preferred to see a balance of power among the principalities so as to prevent any direct challenge to Tartar authority (Hingley, 2003). Historians suspect that at this time Tver was actually the polity gaining regional dominance. The Tartars therefore likely sponsored the rise of Moscow as a counterbalance to Tver. We see this play out in the granting of patents: during the 14th century the khan thrice crowned the grand prince of Tver as administrator of the Russian principalities, once the grand prince of Suzdal. On the remaining occasions the title went to the grand prince of Moscow. The last such appointment went to Vasilii II in 1431. By 1449, Vasilii II declared himself the regional authority and issued patents to the remaining Russian princes (Ostrowski, 2009). Moreover as the Tartar grip over Russian lands slipped near the end of the 15th century, Moscow also found favor as a source of resistance against the encroaching Lithuanians (Hingley, 2003).

From this we see the important shifts that take place under the Tartar Yoke. The profound nature of the lasting effects cannot be exaggerated. The economy of greater Rus was left in disarray through the burning and looting of the cities, and the selling of survivors into slavery. This was further compounded by the tendency of the Tartars to identify the skilled craftsmen and send them to Tartar economic centers.

Moreover we find in the Tartar Yoke the first intimations of what would later become the Iron Curtain: Russia was relegated to a province of the Mongol Empire. This left its focus centered on the East, and effectively cut it off from the rest of Europe. This must provide an important factor in how the European Renaissance failed to have a profound impact within Russian society (Andreyev, 1962; Hingley, 2003).

Finally Andreyev (1962) puts it best when he says, "But Moscow had been learning 'imperialism' from the Mongols...". Tartar rule accentuated the political rivalries among the Russian principalities, while at the same time providing a model of authoritarian rule. The model involved a rigid and remorseless style of government that pitted subgroups against one another to subvert direct challenge to the central authority. In this we find the seed of the later unfolding of Russian history.

Reading and Textual Analysis
The following passage continues the story of Boris and Gleb. We learn of Gleb's reaction to the news that his father is ill and his attempt to return to his father's side as he lies on his deathbed.

21 - И не до сего остави убꙇиства оканьныи Святопълкъ, нъ и на большая, неистовяся, начатъ простиратися...

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- even
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- Not
до -- preposition; <до> (w. gen.) to, up to; (with numerals) about -- at
сего -- demonstrative adjective; masculine genitive singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this (point)
остави -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <оставити, -вл҄ѭ, -виши> let, leave, neglect, forget -- did... stop
убꙇиства -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <ѹбийство> killing, murder -- with the killing
оканьныи -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <оканьнъ> wretched -- the wretched
Святопълкъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Свѧтоплъкъ> Svjatopolk, Svyatopolk, Sviatopolk (name of a prince, brother of Jaroslav, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Svjatopolk
нъ -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
и -- adverb; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- into
большая -- comparative adjective; neuter accusative plural of <бол҄ьи> bigger, more -- more
неистовяся -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <нєистовити сѧ, -влѭ сѧ, -виши сѧ> be mad, be furious -- going mad
начатъ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- he began
простиратися -- verb; infinitive of <простирати, -аѭ, -аѥши> extend + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- to expand

22 - И си на ѹмѣ си положивъ, зълыи съвѣтьникъ дияволь, посла по блаженааго Глѣба, рекъ, "Приди въ бързѣ, отець зоветь тя, и не съдравить ти вельми."

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
си -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- these things
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- in
ѹмѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <ѹмъ> mind, reason, intellect -- mind
си -- pronoun; dative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- his
положивъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <положити, -жѫ, -жиши> lay down, set down -- having set
зълыи -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <зълъ> evil, bad -- the evil
съвѣтьникъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <съвѣтьникъ> counsellor -- counsellor
дияволь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <диꙗволь> of the devil, belonging to the devil, diabolical -- possessed by the devil
посла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- sent
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
блаженааго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- the blessed # Instead of an expected accusative after по
Глѣба -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Глѣбъ> Gleb (name of a prince, brother of Svjatoslav, Jaroslav, Boris and Predslava) -- Gleb # Instead of an expected accusative after по
рекъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- having said
Приди -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- Come
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- ...
бързѣ -- adjective used as substantive; neuter locative singular of <бързъ> rapid, quick -- quickly
отець -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <отьць> father -- father
зоветь -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <звати, зовѫ, зовєши> cry out; call, summon -- calls for
тя -- pronoun; accusative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
съдравить -- verb; 3rd person singular present of <съдравити, -влѭ, -виши> be healthy, be strong -- is... well
ти -- pronoun; dative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- for you # A rather textbook example of the so-called dative of reference: the dative frequently marks a party interested in the action or state denoted by the verb, but which has no direct involvement. Compare English use of for me in statements such as The new rules do not bode well for me.
вельми -- adverb; <вєльми> greatly, very; clearly -- very

23 - Онъ же въ бързѣ, въ малѣ дружинѣ, въсѣдъ на конь, поиде.
 Collapse All
Онъ -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- that one
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- ...
бързѣ -- adjective used as substantive; neuter locative singular of <бързъ> rapid, quick -- quickly
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
малѣ -- adjective; feminine locative singular of <малъ> small, young -- a small
дружинѣ -- noun; feminine locative singular of <дрѹжина> retinue, band of retainers, troop -- retinue
въсѣдъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <въсѣсти, -сѧдѫ, -сѧдєши> sit, sit down; come down -- having mounted
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- ...
конь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <конь> horse -- a horse
поиде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- set out

24 - И пришедъ на Вългу.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
пришедъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- he arrived # Note the use of the past participle instead of a finite (conjugated) verb form.
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- at
Вългу -- proper noun; feminine accusative singular of <Волга> Volga, (Turkic) Itil, Atil (name of a river flowing into the Caspian Sea) -- the Volga

25 - На полѣ потъчеся подъ нимь конь въ ровѣ и наломи ногу мало.
 Collapse All
На -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- on
полѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <полъ, полѹ> side, bank, shore; sex; half -- the bank
потъчеся -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <потъкнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> stick in or on, fix in or on, fasten together, bind; set up, prop up; strike + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- stumbled
подъ -- preposition; <подъ> (w. acc.) under, below (object of motion); (w. instr.) under, below (location) -- beneath
нимь -- pronoun; masculine instrumental singular of <*и> he -- him
конь -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <конь> horse -- the horse
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
ровѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <ровъ> ditch, hole -- a rut
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
наломи -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <наломити, -млѭ, -миши> break, fracture -- broke
ногу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <нога> foot -- (its) leg
мало -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <малъ> small, young -- a bit

26 - И яко приде Смолиньску и поиде отъ Смолиньска, яко зьрѣимо едино, ста на Смядинѣ въ кораблици.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as (soon as)
приде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- he arrived
Смолиньску -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Смольньскъ> Smolensk (name of a city located along the Dnieper river) -- in Smolensk # Note the use of the dative to denote the object of directed motion, rather than the expected accusative.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- again
поиде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- set out
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
Смолиньска -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Смольньскъ> Smolensk (name of a city located along the Dnieper river) -- Smolensk
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- (and) as
зьрѣимо -- noun; neuter nominative singular of <зьрѣимо> visible horizon, distance of eyesight; short distance -- a short distance
едино -- adjective; neuter nominative singular of <єдинъ> one, only -- (it was) only
ста -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <стати, станѫ, станєши> stand -- he boarded
на -- preposition; <на> (w. acc.) onto, against, for, to the extent; (w. loc.) on, at -- at
Смядинѣ -- proper noun; feminine locative singular of <Смядина> Smjadina, Smiadina, Smyadina; Smjadin, Smiadin, Smjadyn, Smiadyn (name of a river, affluent of the Dnieper) -- (the river) Smjadina
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- ...
кораблици -- noun; masculine locative singular of <корабльць> caravel, (a type of) boat -- a caravel

27 - И въ се время пришьла бяаше вѣсть отъ Передъславы къ Ярославу о отьни съмьрти.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- at
се -- demonstrative adjective; neuter accusative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
время -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <врѣмѧ> time -- time
пришьла -- past participle; feminine nominative singular of <прити, -идѫ, -идєши> come, arrive -- arrived
бяаше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- ...
вѣсть -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <вѣсть> announcement, report; rumor; fame -- news
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
Передъславы -- proper noun; feminine genitive singular of <Прѣдъслава> Peredslava, Predslava (name of a princess, sister of Svjatopolk, Jaroslav, Boris, and Gleb) -- Predslava
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
Ярославу -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Ярославъ> Jaroslav, Yaroslav (name of a prince, brother of Svjatopolk, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Jaroslav
о -- preposition; <о (об)> (w. loc.) around; about, concerning; for; by; (w. instr.) at, by, along; (w. acc.) against -- concerning
отьни -- adjective; feminine locative singular of <отьнь> (poss. adj.) of the father, father's -- (his) father's
съмьрти -- noun; feminine locative singular of <съмрьть> death -- death

28 - И присла Ярославъ къ Глѣбу, река, "Не ходи, брате, отець ти умьрлъ, а братъ ти убꙇенъ отъ Святопълка."

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
присла -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <присълати, -лѭ, -лѥши> send -- sent
Ярославъ -- proper noun; masculine nominative singular of <Ярославъ> Jaroslav, Yaroslav (name of the brother of Svjatoslav, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Jaroslav
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
Глѣбу -- proper noun; masculine dative singular of <Глѣбъ> Gleb (name of a prince, brother of Svjatoslav, Jaroslav, Boris and Predslava) -- Gleb
река -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- saying
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
ходи -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <ходити, -ждѫ, -диши> walk, go -- Do... go
брате -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
отець -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <отьць> father -- father
ти -- pronoun; dative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- your
умьрлъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹмрѣти, -рѫ, -рєши> die -- (has) died
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- and
братъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
ти -- pronoun; dative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- your
убꙇенъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- (has been) killed
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- by
Святопълка -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Свѧтоплъкъ> Svjatopolk, Svyatopolk, Sviatopolk (name of a prince, brother of Jaroslav, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Svjatopolk

29 - И си услышавъ, блаженыи въспи плачьмь горькыимь и печалꙇю сьрдьчьною и сице глаголааше, "О увы мнѣ, господине мои!
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
си -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- these things
услышавъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹслꙑшати, -шѫ, -шиши> hear, find out -- Having heard
блаженыи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- the blessed one
въспи -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <възъпити, -пиѭ, -пиѥши> cry out -- cried out
плачьмь -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <плачь> weeping, tears -- with... tears
горькыимь -- adjective; masculine instrumental singular of <горькъ> bitter, pungent, unpleasant -- mournful
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
печалꙇю -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <пєчаль> sadness, affliction -- sadness
сьрдьчьною -- adjective; feminine instrumental singular of <стръдьчинъ> of the heart, related to the heart, heart's -- in his heart
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
сице -- pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <сиць, сицє, сица> such, like this -- the following
глаголааше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <глаголати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> say, speak -- said
О -- interjection; <о> (vocative particle followed by voc. or nom.) o!; (exclamatory particle followed by nom. or gen., less often dat.) oh! -- ...
увы -- interjection; <ѹвꙑ> (w. dat.) alas, woe -- Woe (is)
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me
господине -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <господинъ> lord, master -- lord
мои -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

30 - Отъ двою плачю плачюся и стеню; дъвъю сѣтованꙇю сѣтую и тужю.
 Collapse All
Отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- for
двою -- number adjective; masculine genitive dual of <дъва, дъвѣ> two -- two
плачю -- noun; masculine genitive dual of <плачь> weeping, tears -- sorrows
плачюся -- verb; 1st person singular present of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- I weep
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
стеню -- verb; 1st person singular present of <стєнати, -нѭ, -нѥши> groan, moan -- moan
дъвъю -- number adjective; neuter genitive dual of <дъва, дъвѣ> two -- two
сѣтованꙇю -- noun; neuter genitive dual of <сѣтованьѥ> sorrow -- by... afflictions
сѣтую -- verb; 1st person singular present of <сѣтовати, -тѹѭ, -тѹѥши> mourn -- I am struck
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
тужю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <тѫжити, -жѫ, -жиши> shut in, drive, force, impel; be moved in a confined space; mourn -- pained

31 - Увы мнѣ!
 Collapse All
Увы -- interjection; <ѹвꙑ> (w. dat.) alas, woe -- Woe (is)
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me

32 - увы мнѣ!
 Collapse All
увы -- interjection; <ѹвꙑ> (w. dat.) alas, woe -- Woe (is)
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me

33 - Плачюся по отци; плачю паче, зѣло отчаяхъся, по тебѣ, брате и господине Борисе.
 Collapse All
Плачюся -- verb; 1st person singular present of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- I weep
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
отци -- noun; masculine locative singular of <отьць> father -- (my) father
плачю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn -- (and) I weep
паче -- adverb; <пачє> more, even more -- more
зѣло -- adverb; <зѣло> very -- exceedingly
отчаяхъся -- verb; 1st person singular imperfect of <отъчаꙗти, -чаѭ, -чаѥши> give up hope, despair + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- am... distraught
по -- preposition; <по> (w. dat.) on, about (motion on surface); (w. acc.) on, after, on account of; (w. loc.) after, following, for -- for
тебѣ -- pronoun; locative singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
брате -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
господине -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <господинъ> lord, master -- lord
Борисе -- proper noun; masculine vocative singular of <Борисъ> Boris (name of a prince, brother of Svjatopolk, Jaroslav, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Boris

34 - Како прободенъ еси, како без милости прочее съмрьти предася!
 Collapse All
Како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- How
прободенъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <пробости, -дѫ, -дєши> wound, injure -- run through
еси -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- you were
како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- how
без -- preposition; <бєз (бєс, бє)> (w. gen.) without -- without
милости -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <милость> grace, loving kindness -- mercy
прочее -- comparative adverb; <прочєѥ> therefore, but, finally; afterward -- finally
съмрьти -- noun; feminine dative singular of <съмрьть> death -- death
предася -- verb; 2nd person singular aorist of <прѣдати, -дамь, -даси> hand over, commend + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- you... gave yourself

35 - Како не отъ врага, нъ отъ своего брата пагубу въспрꙇялъ еси.
 Collapse All
Како -- interrogative adverb; <како> how, how is it that -- How
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
врага -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <врагъ> enemy -- an enemy
нъ -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
своего -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свои, своє, своꙗ> own, one's own -- your own # Note the preference for the (third person) reflexive possessive adjective, свои, rather than the second person possessive adjective, твои, even when the context makes clear the reference to the second person.
брата -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
пагубу -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <пагѹба> capture; destruction, ruin; disease; corruption -- ruin
въспрꙇялъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <въсприѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take up, receive -- encountered
еси -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- you

36 - Увы мнѣ!
 Collapse All
Увы -- interjection; <ѹвꙑ> (w. dat.) alas, woe -- Woe (is)
мнѣ -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- to me

37 - Уне бы ми съ тобою умрети, неже уединену и усирену отъ тебе въ семь житꙇи пожити.
 Collapse All
Уне -- comparative adjective; neuter nominative singular of <ѹньи, ѹн҄є, ѹн҄ьши> better -- preferable
бы -- verb; 3rd person singular conditional-optative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- It would have been
ми -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- for me
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
тобою -- pronoun; instrumental singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
умрети -- verb; infinitive of <ѹмрѣти, -рѫ, -рєши> die -- to die
неже -- adverb; <нє> not + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- and not
уединену -- past passive participle; masculine dative singular of <ѹѥдинити, -нѭ, -ниши> leave behind alone; unite -- bereft # Agreeing with preceding ми
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
усирену -- past passive participle; masculine dative singular of <ѹсирити, -рѭ, -риши> deprive of parents, orphan; deprive (in general) -- orphaned # Agreeing with preceding ми
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- of
тебе -- pronoun; genitive singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- ...
семь -- demonstrative adjective; neuter locative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
житꙇи -- noun; neuter locative singular of <житьѥ> life -- life
пожити -- verb; infinitive of <пожити, -живѫ, -живєши> live -- to live out

38 - Азъ мнѣхъ узьрѣти лице твое англьское.
 Collapse All
Азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
мнѣхъ -- verb; 1st person singular aorist of <мьнѣти, мьнѭ, мьниши> believe, think, assume -- hoped
узьрѣти -- verb; infinitive of <ѹзьрѣти, -р҄ѭ, -риши> see, perceive -- to see
лице -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лицє> face, form -- face
твое -- adjective; neuter accusative singular of <твои, твоє, твоꙗ> thy, thine, your, of you (sg.) -- your
англьское -- adjective; neuter accusative singular of <ангєльскъ> of an angel, angel's, angelic -- angelic

39 - Ти се селика туга състиже мя, и унылъ быхъ съ тобою умрети, господине мои.
 Collapse All
Ти -- adverb; <ти> and; but; (added to adverbs) indeed -- Indeed
се -- adverb; <сє> lo, behold -- ...
селика -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <сєликъ> of this size, such -- such
туга -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <тѫга> distress, difficulty -- misery
състиже -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <състигнѫти, -нѫ, -нєши> follow, pursue, catch up with, overtake, obtain, procure -- has befallen
мя -- pronoun; accusative singular of <азъ> I -- me
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
унылъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹнити, -нѭ, -ниши> want; desire; beg; prefer -- wished
быхъ -- verb; 1st person singular conditional-optative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- I would have
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
тобою -- pronoun; instrumental singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
умрети -- verb; infinitive of <ѹмрѣти, -рѫ, -рєши> die -- to die
господине -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <господинъ> lord, master -- lord
мои -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

40 - Нынѣ же что сътворю азъ, умиленыи, очюженыи отъ твоея доброты и отъ отца моего мъногааго разума?
 Collapse All
Нынѣ -- adverb; <нꙑн҄ꙗ, нꙑнѣ> now -- now
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- But
что -- interrogative pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <къто> who -- what
сътворю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- shall... do
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
умиленыи -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <ѹмил҄єнъ> dejected, abject -- dejected
очюженыи -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <отъчѹждити, -дѫ, -диши> separate, remove -- bereft
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- of
твоея -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <твои, твоє, твоꙗ> thy, thine, your, of you (sg.) -- your
доброты -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <доброта> goodness; beauty; virtue -- virtue
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- of
отца -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <отьць> father -- father
моего -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
мъногааго -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <мъногъ> much, many -- great
разума -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <разѹмъ> understanding, sense, opinion, basic thought -- of... counsel

41 - О милыи мои брате и господине!
 Collapse All
О -- interjection; <о> (vocative particle followed by voc. or nom.) o!; (exclamatory particle followed by nom. or gen., less often dat.) oh! -- O
милыи -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- poor
мои -- adjective; masculine vocative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
брате -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
господине -- noun; masculine vocative singular of <господинъ> lord, master -- lord

42 - Аще еси уполучилъ дрьзновенꙇе у господа, моли о моемь унынꙇи, да быхъ азъ съподобленъ былъ ту же страсть въспрꙇяти и съ тобою жити, неже въ свѣтѣ семь прельстьнѣмь."

 Collapse All
Аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- If
еси -- verb; 2nd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- you have
уполучилъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹполѹчити сѧ, -чѫ сѧ, -чиши сѧ> be in the way, come upon, meet -- attained
дрьзновенꙇе -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <дръзновєньѥ> daring, audacity; trust, confidence, reliance -- trust
у -- preposition; <ѹ> (w. gen.) near, at, by -- at the side of
господа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <господь> lord, master -- the Lord
моли -- verb; 2nd person singular imperative of <молити, -лѭ, -лиши> beseech, ask; pray -- beseech
о -- preposition; <о (об)> (w. loc.) around; about, concerning; for; by; (w. instr.) at, by, along; (w. acc.) against -- on behalf of
моемь -- adjective; neuter locative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
унынꙇи -- noun; neuter locative singular of <ѹнꙑньѥ> mourning, sadness; carelessness, negligence, neglect -- sorrow
да -- conjunction; <да> in order to, that; may, let; and, then -- that
быхъ -- verb; 1st person singular conditional-optative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- be
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
съподобленъ -- past passive participle; masculine nominative singular of <съподобити, -блѭ, -биши> deem worthy -- deemed worthy
былъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- ... # The construction allows two interpretations: (1) we might consider быхъ... былъ the main verb, and so съподобленъ should be taken as the predicate adjective; or (2) we might take съподобити itself as the verb, and here we find an example of a true periphrastic passive construction.
ту -- demonstrative adjective; feminine accusative singular of <тъ, то, та> that, that one -- that # Equivalent to OCS тѫ, modifying страсть
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- both # As often, же... и... 'both... and...'
страсть -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <страсть> suffering, woe; passion, martyrdom -- martyrdom
въспрꙇяти -- verb; infinitive of <въсприѩти, -имѫ, -имєши> take up, receive -- to receive
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
съ -- preposition; <съ> (w. gen.) (down) from; (w. instr.) with -- with
тобою -- pronoun; instrumental singular of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
жити -- verb; infinitive of <жити, -живѫ, -живєши> live -- to live
неже -- adverb; <нє> not + conjunction; <жє> and, but -- and not
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
свѣтѣ -- noun; masculine locative singular of <свѣтъ> light -- light # As often with сь, 'this light' refers to 'this existence', i.e. 'this world'.
семь -- demonstrative adjective; masculine locative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
прельстьнѣмь -- adjective; masculine locative singular of <прѣльстьнъ> deceitful, illusive, fraudful, flattering -- illusory

Lesson Text
21 - И не до сего остави убꙇиства оканьныи Святопълкъ, нъ и на большая, неистовяся, начатъ простиратися...

22 - И си на ѹмѣ си положивъ, зълыи съвѣтьникъ дияволь, посла по блаженааго Глѣба, рекъ, "Приди въ бързѣ, отець зоветь тя, и не съдравить ти вельми."

23 - Онъ же въ бързѣ, въ малѣ дружинѣ, въсѣдъ на конь, поиде. 24 - И пришедъ на Вългу. 25 - На полѣ потъчеся подъ нимь конь въ ровѣ и наломи ногу мало. 26 - И яко приде Смолиньску и поиде отъ Смолиньска, яко зьрѣимо едино, ста на Смядинѣ въ кораблици. 27 - И въ се время пришьла бяаше вѣсть отъ Передъславы къ Ярославу о отьни съмьрти. 28 - И присла Ярославъ къ Глѣбу, река, "Не ходи, брате, отець ти умьрлъ, а братъ ти убꙇенъ отъ Святопълка."

29 - И си услышавъ, блаженыи въспи плачьмь горькыимь и печалꙇю сьрдьчьною и сице глаголааше, "О увы мнѣ, господине мои! 30 - Отъ двою плачю плачюся и стеню; дъвъю сѣтованꙇю сѣтую и тужю. 31 - Увы мнѣ! 32 - увы мнѣ! 33 - Плачюся по отци; плачю паче, зѣло отчаяхъся, по тебѣ, брате и господине Борисе. 34 - Како прободенъ еси, како без милости прочее съмрьти предася! 35 - Како не отъ врага, нъ отъ своего брата пагубу въспрꙇялъ еси. 36 - Увы мнѣ! 37 - Уне бы ми съ тобою умрети, неже уединену и усирену отъ тебе въ семь житꙇи пожити. 38 - Азъ мнѣхъ узьрѣти лице твое англьское. 39 - Ти се селика туга състиже мя, и унылъ быхъ съ тобою умрети, господине мои. 40 - Нынѣ же что сътворю азъ, умиленыи, очюженыи отъ твоея доброты и отъ отца моего мъногааго разума? 41 - О милыи мои брате и господине! 42 - Аще еси уполучилъ дрьзновенꙇе у господа, моли о моемь унынꙇи, да быхъ азъ съподобленъ былъ ту же страсть въспрꙇяти и съ тобою жити, неже въ свѣтѣ семь прельстьнѣмь."

Translation
21 Not even at this point did the wretched Svjatopolk stop with the killing, but, going mad, he began to expand into more...
22 And having set these things in his mind, the evil Svjatopolk, possessed by the devil, sent for the blessed Gleb, having said, "Come quickly, father calls for you, and he is not very well for you."
23 And that one, with a small retinue, having mounted a horse, set out quickly. 24 And he arrived at the Volga. 25 And on the bank the horse beneath him stumbled in a rut and broke its leg a bit. 26 And as (soon as) he arrived in Smolensk, he again set out from Smolensk, and as (it was) only a short distance, he boarded a caravel at (the river) Smjadina. 27 At this time news arrived to Jaroslav from Predslava concerning his father's death. 28 And Jaroslav sent to Gleb, saying, "Do not go, brother, your father has died, and your brother has been killed by Svjatopolk."
29 Having heard these things, the blessed one cried out with mournful tears and sadness in his heart and said the following: "Woe is to me, my lord! 30 For two sorrows I weep and moan; by two afflictions I am struck and pained. 31 Woe is to me! 32 Woe is to me! 33 I weep for my father; and I weep more, (and) am exceedingly distraught, for you, Boris, brother and lord. 34 How you were run through, how without mercy you finally gave yourself to death! 35 How not from an enemy, but from your own brother you encountered ruin! 36 Woe is to me! 37 It would have been preferable for me to die with you, and not to live out this life bereft of you and orphaned. 38 I hoped to see your angelic face. 39 Indeed, such misery has befallen me, and I would have wished to die with you, my lord. 40 But now what shall I do, dejected, bereft of your virtue and of my father of great counsel? 41 O my poor brother and lord! 42 If you have attained trust at the side of the Lord, beseech on behalf of my sorrow, that I be deemed worthy both to receive that martyrdom and to live with you, and not in this illusory light."
Grammar
41 The Fourth Conjugation
The fourth conjugation comprises the so-called semi-thematic verbs. These verbs are characterized by the suffix -и- applied to the verbal root and preceding the endings. This suffix originally derives from PIE *-ej- > CS *-i:-. Class IV verbs fall into two subcategories based on the formation of the infinitive stem.

Class IVA: these verbs exhibit the suffix -и-, derived from PIE *-i:-, between the verbal root and the infinitive suffix -ти. Example: ход-и-ти 'to go', with present tense stem ход-и-.
Class IVB: these verbs display the suffix -ѣ-, derived from PIE *-e:-, between the verbal root and the infinitive suffix -ти. After palatal consonants, including -j-, this -ѣ- is backed to -а-. Example: вид-ѣ-ти 'to see', with present tense stem вид-и-; сто-я-ти 'to stand', with present tense stem сто- [stoj-].
In contrast to the preceding classes, verbs of Class IV do not insert the thematic vowel *-e/o- before the present tense endings. Rather they append the endings directly to the -i- suffix characterizing the conjugation. In the first person singular, the ending itself contains a vowel, and in prevocalic position the suffix -i- becomes the palatal glide -j-: *-i-om > *-jom > *-jǫ > Old Russian -ju, OCS -jǫ. This palatal glide in turn triggers j-palatalization in the preceding consonant. Class IV verbs therefore regularly display the effects of j-palatalization in the first person singular.

Another characteristic feature of the fourth conjugation concerns the third person plural. Since the fourth conjugation foregoes the thematic vowel, the ending *-nti is affixed directly to the characteristic -i-. In Common Slavic, rather than producing the back nasalized vowel -ǫ- characteristic of the third person plural in other conjugations, we find instead the front nasalized vowel: *-i-nti > *-intĭ > *-ętĭ > Old Russian -jatĭ, OCS -ętŭ. Thus the ending -ять characterizes the third person plural of Class IV verbs in Old Russian. A corollary of this fact is that the present participle displays a stem in -яч- or -ящ- throughout the paradigm, rather than the stem in -уч- or -ущ- characteristic of other conjugations.

In the remaining forms of the present tense, the characteristic suffix lies in pre-consonantal position and so retains its vocalic character. The remaining forms therefore do not display any effects of j-palatalization, though original root-final velars show the usual palatalization before front vowels. The following table provides examples of some verbs belonging to Class IV.

Class	 	Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	1st Sg.	 	2nd Sg.	 	Pres. Stem	 	Suffixed Stem
IVA	 	молити	 	demand	 	мол҄ю	 	молиши	 	[mol-i-]	 	мол-и-
IVA	 	страшити	 	frighten	 	страшу	 	страшиши	 	[straš-i-]	 	страш-и-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
IVB	 	слышати	 	hear	 	слышу	 	слышиши	 	[slyš-i-]	 	слыш-а-
IVB	 	стояти	 	stand	 	стою	 	стоиши	 	[sto-i-]	 	сто-я-
IVB	 	сѣдѣти	 	seat	 	сѣжу	 	сѣдиши	 	[sěd-i-]	 	сѣд-ѣ-
The j-palatalization of the root-final consonant encountered in the first person singular present indicative active of Class IV verbs also reappears with some frequency in other forms. In particular we find softening of the root-final consonant in the past passive participle, in some imperfect forms, and in the verbal noun, among other forms. Consider the following forms.

Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	Pres. 1 Sg.	 	Pres. 2 Sg.	 	Impf. 1 Sg.	 	Past Pass. Part.
любити	 	love	 	любл҄ю	 	любиши	 	любл҄аахъ	 	любл҄єнъ
пустити	 	allow	 	пущу	 	пустиши	 	пущаахъ	 	пущєнъ
The verbs ходити 'to go' and просити 'to ask' serve to illustrate the forms of Class IVA verbs. The verbs видѣти 'to see' and стояти 'to stand' serve to illustrate the forms of verbs belonging to Class IVB. The paradigms are listed in the table below. Note in particular the j-palatalization in the singular imperative forms of видѣти 'to see': second and third person singular imperative вижи.

Class IV	 	IVA	 	IVA	 	IVB	 	IVB
Stem	 	ход-	 	прос-	 	вид-	 	сто-
Present	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	хожю	 	прошю	 	вижю	 	стою
2	 	ходиши	 	просиши	 	видиши	 	стоиши
3	 	ходить	 	просить	 	видить	 	стоить
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	ходивѣ	 	просивѣ	 	видивѣ	 	стоивѣ
2	 	ходита	 	просита	 	видита	 	стоита
3	 	ходита	 	просита	 	видита	 	стоита
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	ходимъ	 	просимъ	 	видимъ	 	стоимъ
2	 	ходитє	 	проситє	 	видитє	 	стоитє
3	 	ходять	 	просять	 	видять	 	стоять
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	ходи	 	проси	 	вижи	 	стои
3	 	ходи	 	проси	 	вижи	 	стои
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	ходивѣ	 	просивѣ	 	видивѣ	 	стоивѣ
2	 	ходита	 	просита	 	видита	 	стоита
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	ходимъ	 	просимъ	 	видимъ	 	стоимъ
2	 	ходитє	 	проситє	 	видитє	 	стоитє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	ходя	 	прося	 	видя	 	стоя
Fem. N	 	ходячи	 	просячи	 	видячи	 	стоячи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	просимъ	 	видимъ	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect I	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	ходяахъ	 	просяахъ	 	видяахъ	 	стояхъ
2	 	ходяашє	 	просяашє	 	видяашє	 	стояшє
3	 	ходяашє	 	просяашє	 	видяашє	 	стояшє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	ходяаховѣ	 	просяаховѣ	 	видяаховѣ	 	стояховѣ
2	 	ходяашєта	 	просяашєта	 	видяашєта	 	стояшєта
3	 	ходяашєта	 	просяашєта	 	видяашєта	 	стояшєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	ходяахомъ	 	просяахомъ	 	видяахомъ	 	стояхомъ
2	 	ходяашєтє	 	просяашєтє	 	видяашєтє	 	стояшєтє
3	 	ходяаху	 	просяаху	 	видяаху	 	стояху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect II	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	хожаахъ	 	прошаахъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	хожаашє	 	прошаашє	 	-	 	-
3	 	хожаашє	 	прошаашє	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	хожааховѣ	 	прошааховѣ	 	-	 	-
2	 	хожаашєта	 	прошаашєта	 	-	 	-
3	 	хожаашєта	 	прошаашєта	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	хожаахомъ	 	прошаахомъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	хожаашєтє	 	прошаашєтє	 	-	 	-
3	 	хожааху	 	прошааху	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	ходихъ	 	просихъ	 	видѣхъ	 	стояхъ
2	 	ходи	 	проси	 	видѣ	 	стоя
3	 	ходи	 	проси	 	видѣ	 	стоя
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	ходиховѣ	 	просиховѣ	 	видѣховѣ	 	стояховѣ
2	 	ходиста	 	просиста	 	видѣста	 	стояста
3	 	ходиста	 	просиста	 	видѣста	 	стояста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	ходихомъ	 	просихомъ	 	видѣхомъ	 	стояхомъ
2	 	ходистє	 	просистє	 	видѣстє	 	стоястє
3	 	ходиша	 	просиша	 	видѣша	 	стояша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	ходивъ, хожь	 	просивъ, прошь	 	видѣвъ	 	стоявъ
Fem. N	 	ходивъши	 	просивъши	 	видѣвъши	 	стоявъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	ходилъ	 	просилъ	 	видѣлъ	 	стоялъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	прошєнъ	 	видѣнъ	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	ходити	 	просити	 	видѣти	 	стояти
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	ходитъ	 	проситъ	 	видѣтъ	 	стоятъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	хожєньѥ	 	прошєньѥ	 	видѣньѥ	 	стояньѥ
42 The Conjugation of хотѣти
The verb хотѣти 'to want, wish' shows an inflection derived from a mixture of conjugation classes. The present tense in particular shows interesting variation. The verb shows forms that display the palatalization pattern and thematic vowel alternation proper to the Class III verbs. Such forms appear throughout the present tense, except in the third person plural. At the same time хотѣти shows present tense forms proper to Class IV verbs. These forms appear for all but the singular number. In particular, this implies that the singular forms always belong to Class III, while the third person plural always belongs to Class IV. The remaining present tense forms alternate between Classes III and IV. In addition the present active participle belongs to Class IV.

In other parts of the paradigm, some forms are sparsely attested. The following chart lists those forms with the greatest attestation, or which can be reconstructed with the most certainty based on extant forms.

Present III	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
1	 	хочю	 	хочєвѣ	 	хочємъ
2	 	хочєши	 	хочєта	 	хочєтє
3	 	хочєть	 	хочєта	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Present IV	 	 	 	 	 	 
1	 	-	 	хотивѣ	 	хотимъ
2	 	-	 	хотита	 	хотитє
3	 	-	 	хотита	 	хотять
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 
1	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	хошь	 	-	 	-
3	 	хошь	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	хотя	 	 	 	 
Fem. N	 	хотячи	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect	 	 	 	 	 	 
1	 	хотяахъ	 	хотяаховѣ	 	хотяахомъ
2	 	хотяашє	 	хотяашєта	 	хотяашєтє
3	 	хотяашє	 	хотяашєта	 	хотяаху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 
1	 	-	 	-	 	хочомъ
2	 	хочє	 	-	 	-
3	 	хочє	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	-	 	 	 	 
Fem. N	 	-	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	хотѣлъ	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	хотѣти	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	-	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	хотѣньѥ	 	 	 	 
43 The Instrumental Case
The Old Russian instrumental case, as its name suggests, marks the instrument, or means by which, an event takes place. This parallels English use of the preposition with in statements such as He hit me with his shoe. The instrumental also enjoys a sociative connotation, i.e. a notion of accompaniment. This also parallels English use of with in expressions such as I went to the beach with my family. Such sociative uses of the instrumental, however, generally employ the preposition съ 'with' in Old Russian. The following examples show the instrumental of means.

ѡтроци свѣньлъжи исодѣли сѧ суть ѡружьємъ и порты 'Sveinald's retainers are clothed with swords and garments' (Death of Igor).
а вы хощете измрети гладъмь 'but you wish to die by means of hunger' (Olga's Revenge).
ради даемъ медъмь и скорою 'gladly we will furnish (you) with honey and fur(s)' (Olga's Revenge).
и повєлѣ къ коемужьдо голуби и къ воробиеви привязывати цѣри, обьртывающе въ платъкы малы, нитъкою повьрзывающе къ коемужьдо ихъ 'And she commanded them to fasten sulfur to each pigeon and to each sparrow, wrapping it in a small cloth, tying it with a thread to each of them' (Olga's Revenge).
Old Russian also occasionally employs the instrumental to mark the cause or reason for an event or action. Consider the following example of the causal instrumental: тѣмь глаголаху на пєрєвозъ на Кыевъ 'for this (reason) they would say, "to Kii's ferry"' (Primary Chronicle).

As we have seen with numerous other cases, some verbs employ the instrumental case to mark the complement where we might otherwise expect a direct object in the accusative. The following provide examples of the use of the instrumental with certain verbs.

полем же жившемъ ѡсобѣ, и володѣющемъ и родꙑ своими иже и до сеє братьѣ бѧху полѧне 'with the Polianians living by themselves and ruling their own families, even up to this (time) brothers were the Polianians' (Primary Chronicle).
жєняися пѹщеницею 'whosoever marries the divorced woman...' (Ostromir Gospel, Matthew 5.32, cf. Sreznevskij, 1898, vol. 1, p. 858).
Modern Russian often employs the instrumental case to mark a noun or adjective predicated to the subject. This usage is a later development within the history of Russian, emerging roughly around the 15th century. Consider the following late example of the predicative instrumental: бѣ бо у Ярополка жєна Грикинѣ, бяше была преже черницею 'for Jaropolk had a Greek wife who was formerly a nun' (Novgorod Chronicle [Novgorodskaja Letopisĭ], from the 15th century, cf. Matthews, 1960, p.226).

Within Old Russian, such predication generally employs the nominative case (cf. Section 25).

44 Numerals
44.1 Cardinal Numbers
The cardinal numbers allow us to count things: 1 book, 2 books, 3 books, etc. Old Russian shows two basic formations when expressing cardinal numbers: some cardinals function as adjectives modifying the things they are counting, others function as nouns in their own right. When the numerals function as adjectives, a phrase such as two books functions in the same way as a phrase like blue books: the numeral functions as an adjective agreeing with the word it modifies in gender, case, and number (singular, dual, or plural). By contrast, when the numerals themselves function as nouns, the thing which they are counting is represented as a dependent genitive. For example, rather than saying five books with five functioning as an adjective, Old Russian says something akin to a five of books. That is, the numeral represents a group, and the genitive plural specifies what the group consists of: a five-group of books.

In broad outline, the numbers 1 through 4 function as adjectives, while 5 though 10 function as nouns with dependent genitives. The teens roughly repeat the same structure, with 11 through 14 as adjectives, 15 through 19 as nouns.

 

44.1.1 The Numeral 1
Old Russian represents the number 1 with an adjective showing a pronominal declension: одинъ 'one'. The declension is as follows.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Sg.	 	одинъ	 	одино	 	одина
A	 	одинъ	 	одино	 	одину
G	 	одиного	 	одиного	 	одиноѣ
L	 	одиномь	 	одиномь	 	одинои
D	 	одиному	 	одиному	 	одинои
I	 	одинѣмь	 	одинѣмь	 	одиною
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Du.	 	одина	 	одинѣ	 	одинѣ
A	 	одина	 	одинѣ	 	одинѣ
G	 	одиною	 	одиною	 	одиною
L	 	одиною	 	одиною	 	одиною
D	 	одинѣма	 	одинѣма	 	одинѣма
I	 	одинѣма	 	одинѣма	 	одинѣма
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
N Pl.	 	одини	 	одина	 	одины
A	 	одины	 	одина	 	одины
G	 	одинѣхъ	 	одинѣхъ	 	одинѣхъ
L	 	одинѣхъ	 	одинѣхъ	 	одинѣхъ
D	 	одинѣмъ	 	одинѣмъ	 	одинѣмъ
I	 	одинѣми	 	одинѣми	 	одинѣми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The stem одьн- may alternate with the stem один- in any of the forms of the above paradigm. At times one encounters the Old Church Slavic stem єдин-.

44.1.2 The Numeral 2
Old Russian represents the number 2 by the adjective дъва 'two'. This adjective quite naturally occurs solely in the dual number, agreeing with the word it modifies in gender, case, and number. The following table lists the forms.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Du.	 	дъва	 	дъвѣ	 	дъвѣ
A	 	дъва	 	дъвѣ	 	дъвѣ
G	 	дъвою	 	дъвою	 	дъвою
L	 	дъвою	 	дъвою	 	дъвою
D	 	дъвѣма	 	дъвѣма	 	дъвѣма
I	 	дъвѣма	 	дъвѣма	 	дъвѣма
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The word оба 'both' follows the same declension. Some texts also show variant forms such as the genitive dual обѣю.

44.1.3 The Numeral 3
The adjective трьѥ 'three' represents the number 3. This adjective occurs only in the plural. The table below lists the forms.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Pl.	 	трьѥ	 	три	 	три
A	 	три	 	три	 	три
G	 	трьи	 	трьи	 	трьи
L	 	трьхъ	 	трьхъ	 	трьхъ
D	 	трьмъ	 	трьмъ	 	трьмъ
I	 	трьми	 	трьми	 	трьми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The front jer in the masculine nominative plural may yield триѥ as a result of standing in tense position. The genitive plural трьи is phonetically [trĭjĭ] and so may appear as трии owing to the tense position of the first jer, or as трєи as a result of the first jer falling in strong position. Due to the influence of pronominal declensions in which genitive and locative plural forms coincide, we also find occasionally the locative form трьхъ used in place of the genitive. In addition we at times find the form трєма for the instrumental plural.

As an example from the Ostromir Gospel, take три мѣсѧцѧ 'three months', where both words are masculine accusative plural.

44.1.4 The Numeral 4
Old Russian represents the number 4 with the adjective чєтырє 'four', agreeing with the noun it modifies in gender, case, and the plural number. The following table lists the forms.

 	 	Masculine	 	Neuter	 	Feminine
N Pl.	 	чєтырє	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри
A	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри	 	чєтыри
G	 	чєтыръ	 	чєтыръ	 	чєтыръ
L	 	чєтырьхъ	 	чєтырьхъ	 	чєтырьхъ
D	 	чєтырьмъ	 	чєтырьмъ	 	чєтырьмъ
I	 	чєтырьми	 	чєтырьми	 	чєтырьми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
The genitive form чєтыръ is occasionally replaced by чєтырьи, or with fully vocalized strong jer, чєтырєи. In addition we occasionally find чєтырьма for the instrumental.

As an example again from the Ostromir Gospel, take чєтꙑрє мѣсѧци 'four months', where both words are masculine nominative plural.

44.1.5 The Numerals 5, ..., 10
The numerals 5 through 9 all occur as feminine i-stem nouns which govern a genitive plural of the thing counted. The numbers are as follows:

5: пять 'five',
6: шєсть 'six',
7: сєдмь or сємь 'seven',
8: осмь or восмь 'eight',
9: дєвять 'nine'.
These nouns follow the declension of the feminine i-stem noun кость 'bone' (cf. Section 11.1). For example, пять 'five' shows пяти in the genitive, locative, and dative singular, and пятью in the instrumental singular.

The word дєсять 'ten' represents the numeral 10. This largely shows the forms proper to the declension of consonant stems (cf. Section 16).

 	 	Singular	 	Dual	 	Plural
N Pl.	 	дєсять	 	дєсяти	 	дєсятє
A	 	дєсять	 	дєсяти	 	дєсяти
G	 	дєсятє	 	дєсяту	 	дєсятъ
L	 	дєсятє	 	дєсяту	 	дєсятьхъ
D	 	дєсяти	 	дєсятьма	 	дєсятьмъ
I	 	дєсятью	 	дєсятьма	 	дєсятьми
V	 	 	 	 	 	 
Again the Ostromir Gospel provides an example: подобьно... дєсѧти дѣвъ 'similar... to ten virgins', or more literally 'similar... to ten of virgins'. Here дєсѧти is the dative singular, while дѣвъ 'of virgins' is the genitive plural.

44.1.6 The Teens
The formation of the teens 11, ..., 19 follows almost exactly the constructions of the numerals 1 through 10. Viewed from the perspective of English, the teens read one on ten (eleven), two on ten (twelve), three on ten (thirteen), etc. Thus the grammatical construction in Old Russian is exactly the grammatical construction encountered with the individual numerals 1, 2, 3, etc., the only difference being the addition of the phrase on ten. Specifically, the numerals are as follows.

11: одинъ на дєсяти masc., одино на дєсяти neut., одина на дєсяти fem.;
12: дъва на дєсяти masc., дъвѣ на дєсяти neut., дъвѣ на дєсяти fem. dual;
13: трьѥ на дєсяти masc., три на дєсяти neut., три на дєсяти fem. plural;
14: чєтырє на дєсяти masc., чєтыри на дєсяти neut., чєтыри на дєсяти fem. plural;
15: пять на дєсяти;
16: шєсть на дєсяти;
17: сєдмь на дєсяти or сємь на дєсяти;
18: осмь на дєсяти or восмь на дєсяти;
19: дєвять на дєсяти.
The Ostromir Gospel again provides an example: яко дъвоѭ на дєсѧтє лѣтѹ 'about twelve years old'. Literally this reads 'roughly of two years on ten', where the dual adjective дъвоѭ, in the genitive, agrees with the dual genitive лѣтѹ.

44.1.7 The Decades
Old Russian constructs the decades 20, 30, ..., 90 as groups of tens. Thus the numeral 20 is rendered by two tens, 30 by three tens, 40 by four tens, 50 by five (of) tens, etc. Thus we return to the problem of counting with the numerals 1, 2, 3, ..., 9, but now the thing counted is a group of ten: дєсять. Hence the decades also break down into two groups: those where дєсять is modified by an adjective, and those where дєсять is in the genitive plural, depending on the numeral. The specific forms are as follows.

20: дъва дєсяти. This has nominative and accusative dual дъва дєсяти, genitive and locative дъвою дєсяту, dative and instrumental дъвѣма дєсятьма. We also find alternate constructions with the genitive plural: дъвоѭ дєсѧтъ, literally 'of/on two of tens'.
30: три дєсятє, where дєсятє is the nominative plural.
40: чєтырє дєсятє, where we note that the form чєтырє suggests the collocation is viewed as masculine plural. Consider an example taken from the Novgorod First Chronicle: и чєтꙑрьдєсят цєрковъ огорѣ 'and forty churches burned'. Here we see that the numeral 40 as a unit follows the genitive construction encountered with the numerals 5 through 10: namely the phrase literally translates as 'and forty of churches burned'.
50: пятьдєсятъ, where дєсятъ is a genitive governed by пять: literally 'five of tens'.
60: шєстьдєсятъ. We also find constructions where both elements are declined: съ шєстьюдєсятью мужь 'with sixty (of) men'.
70: сємьдєсятъ or сєдмьдєсять. For example, по сємидєсятъ жєнъ 'seventy wives apiece' (Primary Chronicle), literally 'according to seven of tens of wives', where сємь is in the dative in accordance with the preposition по.
80: осмьдєсятъ.
90: дєвяносто. This term breaks from the preceding patterns. Here дєвяносто is a neuter twofold noun. We find for example двѣ... дєвяностѣ мужь '180... men', but more literally 'two 90s of men'. We also find the noun with the masculine gender: два дєвяноста, masculine nominative dual. But we do find attestations which follow the pattern set by the preceding decades, where 90 is viewed as nine (of) tens: нє оставить ли дєвѧти дєсѧтъ дєвѧти 'will he not leave the ninety nine'. Here both instances of дєвѧти take the genitive case as direct objects of the negated verb, while дєсѧтъ is genitive plural dependent upon the first дєвѧти.
44.1.8 The Hundreds
The Old Russian system for the hundreds parallels that for the decades. Here the o-stem neuter noun съто 'hundred' takes over the role that дєсять 'ten' plays in the decades. The numerals are as follows.

100: съто, a neuter twofold noun. The thing counted is in the genitive plural.
200: дъвѣ сътѣ, where both elements decline according to the twofold paradigm. The thing enumerated is in the genitive plural.
300: три съта, with both elements declining as twofold neuters in the plural. The thing enumerated is in the genitive plural.
400: чєтыри съта, with the construction paralleling that of 300.
500: пять сътъ. Here, as with other constructions based on 5, пять is a noun governing сътъ in the genitive plural: literally five of hundreds. The thing counted is in the genitive plural.
600: шєсть сътъ, with the construction paralleling that of 500.
700: сємь сътъ, as the preceding.
800: осмь сътъ, as the preceding.
900: дєвять сътъ, as the preceding.
44.1.9 The Thousands
The Old Russian word for thousand is тысяча. This follows the declension of the ja-stem feminine nouns. The noun takes its case from the construction in which it finds itself, and the thing counted is placed in the genitive plural.

Old Russian employs the word тьма in both the numeric sense ten thousand and the general sense of an extremely large quantity. This too takes its case from its grammatical role in its clause, and the thing enumerated is placed in the genitive plural.

44.2 The Ordinals
The ordinal numbers, as their name suggests, are used to place things in order. That is, they serve to specify what element is first, which is second, third, and so on. With the exception of трєтьи 'third', the ordinals for 1 through 10 are hard twofold definite adjectives:

1st: пьрвыи;
2nd: въторыи or другыи;
3rd: трєтьи, declined as a soft twofold adjective;
4th: чєтвьртыи;
5th: пятыи;
6th: шєстыи;
7th: сєдьмыи or сємыи;
8th: осмыи;
9th: дєвятыи;
10th: дєсятыи.
45 Verb Use: Non-Past
In Old Russian we must take care to distinguish between tenses as represented by morphology and tenses as represented by meaning or sense. In Old Russian the term present tense first and foremost denotes a set of morphological endings: -у, -еши, -еть, etc. As it turns out, for the most part when a verb employs these endings, the resulting sense is one of present time, of talking about the here-and-now. In such instances form and meaning converge. But Old Russian has no future tense with distinct endings or a special verbal suffix, for instance. Instead, it employs the same endings, and even the same stem, which pertain to the morphological present tense. Thus we find "present tense" forms where the actual meaning is in fact future. And in this we find that the term present tense, when applied to the endings -у, -еши, -еть, etc., is something of a misnomer. Really they are present-future endings. Or more typical terminology is to call this set of endings non-past.

Part of the distinction in sense between present and future comes from the particular interaction between the representation of an action by means of a verbal root and the use of the present tense morphology. This matter of the "representation of an action" frequently goes by the name verbal aspect. We will touch briefly on this topic below and in Section 50.

45.1 The Present Tense
More than anything the Old Russian present tense is a morphological category. Verbs conjugated in the present tense may take on a range of senses. Primarily, as luck would have it, the dominant sense is to signify actions or states occurring contemporaneously with the utterance: that is, a true present tense, saying that the action is happening now.

As a point of comparison, note that the English present tense generally does not have such an interpretation (except with a restricted class of verbs, such as to be and others). If one says in English I walk, this need not refer to now, as the sentence is uttered; rather it typically refers to a habitual action, such as I walk to the bus stop on Tuesday mornings. In order to elicit the sense of a true present, that is of an action ongoing at the time of utterance, English must generally employ the continuous present: I am walking (right now).

The Old Russian morphological present, in contrast to English, can indeed function as a true present. It may be translated either by the English simple present or continuous present as context suggests. Consider the following examples of the Old Russian true present.

азъ словомь симъ молюсѧ Богѹ 'With this word I am praying to God' (Alphabet Poem).
ѥгожє вьсѧ добрꙑя дѣтєли и подвигꙑ прилагающє сихъ ѹгодьницѣхъ по єдиномѹ нє постꙑдимъсѧ '... of whom we are not ashamed comparing all his great deeds and struggles, one by one, to those of the virtuous men' (Pannonian Legend).
и есть могыла его у искоростѣня града въ дєрєвѣхъ и до сего дьне 'and his grave is near the city Iskorosten in Dereva even to this day' (Death of Igor).
по чьто идеши опять 'What do you come back for?' (Death of Igor).
а щекъ сѣдяше на горѣ идеже нынѣ зоветься щековица 'and Shchek settled on a hill where now it is called Shchekovica' (Primary Chronicle).
Parallel to the English present, the Old Russian present tense may take on a gnomic connotation, representing an action as always obtaining. Take for example the present tense in the English saying Haste makes waste. The present tense verb makes does not mark the event as happening now, or even as being habitual. Rather it marks a general truth, supposed to be valid at all times. Consider the following uses of the Old Russian present as a gnomic present: и съдумавъше дрєвєляне съ кънязьмь своимь Малъмь, аще ся въвадить вълкъ въ овьцѣ, то вꙑносить вьсе стадо, аще не убиють єго "and the Derevlians sought counsel with their prince Mal: 'If a wolf introduces itself among the sheep, then it will carry off the entire flock, if they do not kill it'" (Death of Igor).

We also find in Old Russian some instances of what might be termed a historical present. In English this term denotes the stereotyped use of the present found in jokes and stories surrounding the pub: I was sitting having a drink last night and this guy walks into the bar wearing a pink fedora.... Here context makes it clear that, even though walks is an instance of the present tense, the action which it depicts occurs in past time. Old Russian too employs this type of historical present, as the following example suggests: слышавъше древляне яко опять идеть 'The Derevlians heard that he is coming back' (Death of Igor). This may be a historical present, employing the present where we might otherwise expect a past tense, since the past participle слышавъше makes clear that the hearing of the report had already occurred. However we may also suppose the use of the present derives from a tendency toward direct quotation: "The Derevlians heard, 'he is coming back!'". In Old Russian яко 'that' may introduce direct as well as indirect quotation, whereas the parallel English word that only introduces indirect quotation.

In addition we occasionally find in Old Russian forms belonging to the present tense where context would lead one to expect an imperative form. Consider the following example of the present in place of the imperative: поимемъ жену єго вольгу за кнѧзь свои малъ 'Let us take his wife Olga for our prince Mal', i.e. '... to marry our prince Mal' (Olga's Revenge). The form поимемъ, from the verb по-яти 'to take', is strictly speaking the first person plural present indicative active. However, this could simply be scribal variation representing the normalized form поимѣмъ of the imperative.

Finally the present forms may frequently be used with future significance. This often results from the interaction between verbal aspect and the tense system. The following example shows a prefixed perfective verb used as future: идѣте съ данию домови, а азъ възбращюся и похожю єще 'Go home with the tribute; but I will turn back and will walk back yet again' (Death of Igor).

The next section will discuss further details surrounding the representation of events in future time in Old Russian.

45.2 The Future Tense
As a strict morphological paradigm, Old Russian exhibits no specific future tense. Rather the present tense forms frequently serve to denote future events, parallel to English usage of present continuous forms as in I am going to the airport tomorrow, or parallel to the German present tense as in Wir rufen Sie dann an 'We'll call you up then'. Many noteworthy scholars have proposed that Old Russian exhibits a system of verbal aspect in which perfective verbs conjugated in the (morphological) present tense have future meaning. But even the most cogent of these arguments encounter difficulties with certain apparent exceptions. Consider the following example.

Chapter	 	Ostromir Gospel	 	Greek Text	 	English Translation
John 3.12a	 	ащє зємьна рѣхъ вамъ и нє вѣрѹѥтє	 	ei ta epigeia eipon humi:n kai ou pisteuete	 	If I told you earthly things and you do not believe
John 3.12b	 	како ащє рєкѫ вамъ нєбєсьнаꙗ вѣрѹѥтє	 	po:s ean eipo: humi:n ta epourania pisteusete	 	then how, if I tell you the heavenly things, will you believe?
In the above we find one and the same present tense form, вѣрѹѥтє, translating both a Greek present tense form, pisteuete 'you believe', and a future tense form, pisteusete 'you will believe'. Various possible resolutions present themselves:

Inherently perfective: we might suppose the verb вѣровати 'to believe' is inherently perfective, perhaps by means of the -ова- suffix. Thus the present tense of вѣровати would naturally have future meaning, translating pisteusete without problem. However the fact that the same form translates a present tense, pisteuete, means we must interpret the Greek form not as a true present (since an Old Russian perfective present would not have such a sense), but rather as a gnomic present: 'you never believe me (when I've told you the heavenly things)'.
Non-participation: the verb вѣровати 'to believe' might not yet have participated in the budding aspectual system at this early stage of Old Russian.
Each of the above interpretations will have its adherents. It therefore seems advisable at the outset to admit for any Old Russian verb the possibility that the present tense forms may have future meaning, either simply because the morphology allowed this in a manner akin to English or German, or because of the perfectivity of the underlying verb. On a case-by-case basis the reader may then decide what factor or factors most contribute to the futurity of the form.

Luckily Old Russian also employs some periphrastic constructions to express the future in a manner less controversial than the above. In particular the verbs начяти, почяти, учяти, each 'to begin'; стати 'to stand', also 'to become'; хотѣти 'to wish'; имѣти, имати 'to have' may each take an infinitive complement to form a periphrastic future tense. Constructions involving имѣти or имати can have not only the sense of a simple future, but also the sense of obligation inherent in the parallel English construction to have to (do something). Similarly constructions with хотѣти could denote a desire, as in to want to (do something), or a simple future, as in will (do something). Consider the following examples.

который князь почьнеть хотѣти... отъяти 'whichever prince shall wish... to take away' (Gramota Mstislava Volodimiroviča, cf. Matthews, 1960, p. 205).
Христосъ имать сохранити тя 'Christ shall preserve thee' (Laurentian Codex, 1377; cf. Matthews, 1960, p. 205).
но хочю вѣ почтити наутрия 'but I shall honor you tomorrow' (Olga's Revenge, Laurentian Codex, 1377; cf. Matthews, 1960, p. 205).
The verbal forms буду, будеши, etc., usually assigned to the verb быти 'to be', are the only verb forms in Old Russian with explicitly future meaning. Consider the following example.

нъ не побѣженъ будеши 'but thou shalt not be defeated' (Nifont, cf. Matthews, 1960, p. 204).
толи не будеть мєжю нами мира, елиже камень начьнеть плавати, а хъмель грянути 'There will not be peace between us at such time as the stone will float and hops (will) sink' (Primary Chronicle). Or more literally, '... such time as the stone begins to float and the hops (begins) to sink'. This clearly highlights the parallelism between the use of буду on the one hand and the periphrastic future constructions on the other.
Nevertheless the forms morphologically belong to the present tense. Moreover, unlike modern Russian, Old Russian typically does not employ буду 'I shall be' to form a periphrastic future tense with the infinitive. This is a later development.

Old Russian Online
Lesson 10
Todd B. Krause and Jonathan Slocum
VI. Early East Slavic Writing
The earliest East Slavic manuscripts serve to inform and to check scholars' understanding and reconstruction of the language spoken in the land of the Rus, as well as of its immediate predecessor, Proto-Slavic. Such reconstruction, however, depends critically on a proper understanding of the nature of the manuscripts and the process of their production. In the present section we discuss the work of two scholars, Horace G. Lunt and Charles E. Gribble, whose insights into the study of manuscripts elucidate some of the problems and pitfalls of manuscript interpretation.

VI.i The Interplay between Phonetic and Traditional Systems of Spelling
Linguistics seeks to describe language as a system. In the general case, that system comprises sound. The written word provides but an imperfect representation of that sound. Spelling mistakes abound, but far from being a hindrance, they often assist the linguist's task. Spelling mistakes provide clues to actual pronunciation, which may in fact differ from the the sounds a specific sequence of letters might suggest. To wit, if a writer is unsure of the spelling of a word, he or she will make a guess. That guess will, in turn, be informed by the writer's own pronunciation. The writer will choose the sequence of letters which he or she thinks represents the desired sound.

Historical linguistics seeks to describe the evolution of the system of a given language or languages over time. Describing the evolution of languages requires an understanding of both the starting point and the end point of the period under consideration. The description of the end point, relatively speaking, is usually a simple matter: it is typically a modern language, whose characteristics can be confirmed via recourse to native speakers. The starting point, by comparison, comprises some unique difficulties: frequently it is an ancient language, with no remaining native speakers. Accurate description of linguistic evolution requires a priori an accurate description of the starting point, i.e. of the original ancient language. The scholar must therefore reconstruct from the available materials the linguistic system of the ancient language in question. One fundamental aspect of this description is an adequate reconstruction of the phonological system.

Frequently it happens that the ancient language texts which most concern the historical linguist come from the earliest documentary period of that language. Such texts are frequently contemporaneous with, or follow shortly upon, the invention of the writing system employed or the importation of a foreign writing system and its original application to the language under investigation. In such instances the writing system is often novel enough to the writers of the texts that there is as yet no sense of "correct spelling": the writing system has been invented or imported precisely to represent the sounds of the language as uttered. Spelling therefore has not yet been systematized, and the writer spells essentially phonetically. In such situations, when the linguist finds spellings which differ between two authors, this is assumed to arise as a result of differences in pronunciation.

The preceding provides a caricature of the logic underlying the reconstruction of ancient phonemic systems through the careful analysis of spellings and misspellings in historical documents. However it overlooks some subtleties which can lead to erroneous conclusions, particularly in the reconstruction of the language of the texts and speakers of early East Slavic. The crucial ingredient often left out of analyses is this: any writing system is first and foremost a system. As such, it must be learned; to be learned, it must conform to rules. The very process of learning the system immediately generates notions of convention, or more loosely "correctness". The writer's desire to adhere to convention may interfere with the tendency to write phonetically, even when guessing the spelling of a word. This should, as a result, give the linguist a sense of caution before accepting any particular spelling as a representation of the underlying phonetic reality (Lunt, 1951). Based upon these considerations, the eminent scholar Horace G. Lunt outlines two basic principles that must be applied when interpreting documentary evidence (Lunt, 1987):

Letters are not necessarily phonetic symbols; orthography is largely a matter of convention.
Every linguistic system has its own internal variation.
Within the tradition of Old Russian, i.e. of early East Slavic, the writing system was adopted from the South Slavic area of the alphabet's invention. Moreover early documents such as the Ostromir Gospel were generally based on Old Church Slavonic models. The linguistic variation exhibited by the texts will therefore fall into three basic types (Lunt, 1987):

Internal to OCS;
Internal to Old Russian;
Internal and shared by both.
This variation may result from geographic distance, i.e. regional dialectal variation, or from temporal distance, i.e. evolution within the language in situ. Incorrect assignment of variation to one type or the other may lead to a faulty picture of the state of the language during any given period and its subsequent evolution (Lunt, 1987).

At the same time it is important to understand the perspective of the contemporaneous speaker. The preponderance of evidence surrounding the Moravian mission, as well as the reception of the liturgy among the East Slavs, suggests that East and South Slavs recognized no fundamental difference in the speech of their respective communities at the point in which the languages entered the historical written record. We may therefore tentatively assume that speakers in the tenth and eleventh centuries recognized any variation between their respective speech patterns as variation within one common language (Lunt, 1987).

The manuscript copyists themselves were professionals, or at the very least technicians. They had learned a detailed system and were employed to apply it. They assigned a notion of correctness to the system. In copying a manuscript, the copyist sought to reproduce the text. This however does not mean that the copyist sought to reproduce the spelling. Copyists often felt free to "correct" manuscripts. Naturally the notion of "correctness" could be informed by local pronunciation. But arguably more important was the influence of the learned system on the notion of "correctness". Lunt describes how Durnovo had earlier outlined the fundamental points underlying such considerations (Lunt, 1987):

Written language is always standardized to some extent;
Learners are taught the conventional system, not the phonetic principles that underlie it;
They learn the system well or poorly;
The system does not describe a local dialect, but a standard (literary) language: it serves a different purpose and may be a combination of dialectal features.
Thus in the process of finding the correct spelling of a word, the Old Russian copyist would first have recourse to the rules of the system before possibly employing phonetic considerations. We find the same phenomenon in English: a writer schooled in the English writing system but at a loss for how to spell the plural of the particular would box would, all things being equal, be much more likely to guess boxes than *boxez, since the system itself contains no readily available instances of a plural written with final -z. The pattern established by the system frequently supersedes phonetic reasoning.

The task for the scholar, as Lunt explains, is therefore threefold (Lunt, 1987):

establish the "norms of orthography preferred by the scribe";
decide what is "right" and "wrong" from the scribe's perspective;
explain "wrong" instances in terms of other factors: the scribe's spoken dialect, norms of the manuscript being copied, etc.
In this context, Lunt points out, forms reconstructed on linguistic grounds can serve as a guide to establishing the norms of scribal practice, but they need not provide a priori a rule for deciding what is "right" and what is "wrong" (Lunt, 1987).

VI.ii The Writing of Jers in Old Russian Manuscripts
The work of Gribble (1989) provides a concise and lucid account of a particular application of the principles described in the preceding section to problems of the linguistic interpretation of documentary evidence in Old Russian. We have seen that in early Slavic the jers were still vocalic, that is they could form the nucleus of a syllable. Moreover, if we judge correctness by our expectations based on etymological grounds, manuscripts originating in the regions of the early Rus generally write the jers as correctly as any other manuscript tradition in the early Slavic world until the middle of the 12th century. Nevertheless we frequently find that the scribe "drops" jers where they would otherwise be expected. The question therefore arises: what were the reasons for dropping the jers?

In a review of the literature surrounding the question, Gribble highlights four illustrative examples of the data contained in the early East Slavic manuscripts (Gribble, 1989):

Jers are dropped in the initial syllable of къто and князь: кто, кънязь;
вьсь and дьнь often drop the initial jer: всь & днь;
съдє frequently omits the jer;
къ drops the jer when followed immediately by тому.
Concerning the loss of jers in the initial syllables of кто and князь, Gribble makes the following observations. Though jer loss is frequent in initial syllables, scholars have little reason to believe that initial syllables had stress any weaker than other syllables not bearing the primary stress. This follows at least in part from the fact that early East Slavic still had the remnants of a tonal system inherited from Proto-Indo-European and still exhibited in certain members of the closely related Baltic family of languages (Gribble, 1989). The difference in stress between syllables in the earliest period of East Slavic was therefore likely minimal, and stress was in all probability not the deciding factor in the loss of jers in initial syllables.

The same considerations moreover suggest that jer loss in кто and князь was also not to be ascribed to the jers' pre-tonic position. Additionally, in other words showing a jer subject to loss, e.g. сътвор-, the stress frequently does not fall on the syllable immediately following the jer that can be dropped (Gribble, 1989).

The example of всь and днь, as Gribble points out, is important for discarding another hypothesis: that perhaps loss is essentially conditioned by the strong-versus-weak opposition of jers. In the instance of всь and днь, the jers dropped are precisely the strong jers, not the weak. Thus we may consider it unlikely that the strong-weak opposition of jers was the deciding factor in jer loss.

As we move to the remaining examples, we should keep in mind a particular fact of languages: they are idiosyncratic in the clusters of consonants that they "permit", that is the clusters that naturally appear as the result of historical evolution up to the epoch being described. As a simple example, English abhors an initial consonant cluster [kt], though it finds no particular problem pronouncing the cluster word-internally, as in tic-tock or backtalk. Classical Greek, by contrast, evidently did not bat an eyelash at initial [kt]: kteino: 'I kill'.

Gribble credits Markov and then Lunt with drawing attention to the consonant clusters that result due to jer loss (Gribble, 1989). In particular we find that сд, the cluster resulting from jer loss in съдє, was not a permitted cluster within early East Slavic. More specifically, Lunt had noted in work on the OCS Marianus manuscript that the consonant groups kt, čt, ps, pt are not found elsewhere in the language. Thus jer omission in a word such as кто would be interpreted phonemically as [kVto], with an interpolated vowel (Gribble, 1989). Gribble finally proposes that this serves to explain why jers are dropped in certain syllables and not in others. In particular, jers may be dropped when the resulting consonant cluster does not naturally occur within the language.

From the copyist's perspective, several factors would have contributed to such a tendency. Gribble outlines the following (Gribble, 1989):

When copying another South Slavic manuscript, the original itself may have omitted jers.
Certain words regularly omitted letters. Typically these were words related to the divine, such as богъ, and they were marked with a "titlo" (tilde). But they nevertheless likely contributed to a general willingness to forego letters which could easily be surmised.
Jer omission saved space.
Moreover, in the practice of copying manuscripts, scribal convention would have reinforced some consonant combinations as unproblematic. For example, as кто was already a frequent spelling, the sequence кт would not have alarmed the typical copyist. This would in turn make jer omission in къ тому unobjectionable. However where the consonant cluster that would result from jer loss could otherwise occur naturally, there was a strong tendency to retain jers. This happens for instance with the sequence сън-: both сън- and сн- could occur naturally in early East Slavic, and so the jer was therefore typically retained (Gribble, 1989).

Gribble's work provides an elegant example of how consideration of the scribe's perspective can complement linguistic understanding with the goal of explaining apparent anomalies. In the author's own words, "I would maintain that it is not a matter of ignoring the living pronunciation, but just the opposite: the living pronunciation was a factor that was taken for granted, which meant that no confusion could arise from the omission" (Gribble, 1989).

Reading and Textual Analysis
Our final selection relates the scene when Svjatopolk's henchmen finally catch up with Gleb on his futile voyage to his father's side. We leave off as Gleb implores his enemies to have mercy on his innocence.

43 - И сице ему стенющю и плачющюся, и сльзами землю омачающю, приспѣша вънезапу посъланꙇи отъ Святопълка, зълыя его слугы, немилостивꙇи кръвопꙇицѣ, братоненавидьници люти зѣло, сверѣпа звѣри душю имѣюще.

 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
сице -- adverb; <сицє> thus, so -- so
ему -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- he
стенющю -- participle; masculine dative singular of <стєнати, -нѭ, -нѥши> groan, moan -- (while... was) mourning # Note the dative absolute construction ему стенющю и плачющюся и... омачающю
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
плачющюся -- participle; masculine dative singular of <плакати, плачѫ, -чєши> weep, mourn + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- weeping
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
сльзами -- noun; feminine instrumental plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- with (his) tears
землю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <зємл҄ꙗ> earth, land -- the ground
омачающю -- participle; masculine dative singular of <омачати, -чаѭ, -чаѥши> moisten, wet -- wetting
приспѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <приспѣти, -спѣѭ, -спѣѥши> come; approach, near; hasten -- approached
вънезапу -- adverb; <вънєзаапѫ> suddenly -- suddenly
посъланꙇи -- past passive participle; masculine nominative plural of <посълати, -л҄ѭ, -л҄ѥши> send, summon -- the dispatch
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
Святопълка -- proper noun; masculine genitive singular of <Свѧтоплъкъ> Svjatopolk, Svyatopolk, Sviatopolk (name of a prince, brother of Jaroslav, Boris, Gleb, and Predslava) -- Svjatopolk
зълыя -- adjective; feminine nominative plural of <зълъ> evil, bad -- evil # Taking its grammatical gender from the grammatical gender of слугы
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
слугы -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <слѹга> servant -- servants # The form is grammatically feminine, though the referent is masculine
немилостивꙇи -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <нємилостивъ> unmerciful -- unmerciful (group)
кръвопꙇицѣ -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <кръвопийца> blood-drinking, bloodthirsty -- a bloodthirsty # Feminine form, but with masculine grammatical agreement
братоненавидьници -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <братонєвавидьникъ> hostile to one's brother -- an... (bunch of) brother-haters
люти -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <лютъ> terrible, wild -- ferocious
зѣло -- adverb; <зѣло> very -- exceedingly
сверѣпа -- adjective; masculine genitive singular of <свєрѣпъ> wild -- wild
звѣри -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <звѣрь> (wild) animal -- of a... beast
душю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <дѹша> soul -- the soul
имѣюще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <имѣти, имѣѭ, имѣѥши> have, possess -- possessing

44 - Святыи же поиде въ кораблици, и срѣтоша и усть Смядины.
 Collapse All
Святыи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <свѧтъ> holy, blessed -- the holy one
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- And
поиде -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <поити, -идѫ, -идєши> go, set out; go back, return -- set out
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
кораблици -- noun; masculine locative singular of <корабльць> caravel, (a type of) boat -- the caravel
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
срѣтоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <сърѣсти, -рѧштѫ, -рѧштєши> meet -- they met
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- him
усть -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <ѹсть> door, gate, entrance, mouth -- at the mouth # The accusative here gives more the connotation of 'coming up to the mouth of...'.
Смядины -- proper noun; feminine genitive singular of <Смядина> Smjadina, Smiadina, Smyadina; Smjadin, Smiadin, Smjadyn, Smiadyn (name of a river, affluent of the Dnieper) -- of the Smjadina

45 - И яко узьрѣ я святыи, въздрадовася душею, а они узьрѣвъше и омрачаахуся и гребяху къ нему.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
узьрѣ -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <ѹзьрѣти, -р҄ѭ, -риши> see, perceive -- caught sight of
я -- pronoun; masculine accusative plural of <*и> he -- them
святыи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <свѧтъ> holy, blessed -- the holy one
въздрадовася -- verb; 3rd person singular aorist of <въздрадовати сѧ, -дѹѭ сѧ, -дѹѥши сѧ> be happy, rejoice -- he rejoiced
душею -- noun; feminine instrumental singular of <дѹша> soul -- in his soul
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- but
они -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- they
узьрѣвъше -- past participle; masculine nominative plural of <ѹзьрѣти, -р҄ѭ, -риши> see, perceive -- (as)... saw
и -- pronoun; masculine accusative singular of <*и> he -- him
омрачаахуся -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <омрачати, -чаѭ, -чаѥши> grow dark, darken -- they grew dark
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
гребяху -- verb; 3rd person plural imperfect of <грєти, грєбѫ, грєбєши> scrape; comb; row; take the helm, steer (a ship) -- rowed
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- toward
нему -- pronoun; masculine dative singular of <*и> he -- him

46 - А съ цѣлованꙇя чаяаше отъ нихъ прꙇяти.
 Collapse All
А -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
съ -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- He
цѣлованꙇя -- noun; neuter accusative plural of <цѣлованьѥ> salutation, greeting, embrace -- greetings
чаяаше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect <чаꙗти, чаѭ, чаѥши> hope; expect -- expected
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
нихъ -- pronoun; masculine genitive plural of <*и> he -- them
прꙇяти -- verb; infinitive of <приѩти, приимѫ, приимєши> take, seize -- to receive

47 - И яко быша равьно пловуще, начаша скакати зълꙇи они въ лодꙇю его, обнажены меча имуще въ рукахъ, бльщащася, акы вода.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- But
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- as
быша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- they
равьно -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <равьнъ> level, even -- alongside
пловуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <плѹти, пловѫ, пловєши> flow; navigate, sail -- (as)... sailed up
начаша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <начѧти, -чьнѫ, -чьнєши> begin -- began
скакати -- verb; infinitive of <скакати, -чѫ, -чєши> dance; spring vigorously, to leap or jump up, exult, revel, boast -- to leap
зълꙇи -- adjective; masculine nominative plural of <зълъ> evil, bad -- evil
они -- demonstrative pronoun; masculine nominative plural of <онъ, оно, она> that, that one -- those... men
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- into
лодꙇю -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <лодья> boat -- boat
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- his
обнажены -- past passive participle; masculine accusative plural of <обънажити, -жѫ, -жиши> uncover; strip, deprive; spread apart, expand -- unsheathed
меча -- noun; masculine accusative plural of <мєчь> sword -- swords
имуще -- participle; masculine nominative plural of <имѣти, имамь, имаши> have, hold -- holding
въ -- preposition; <въ> (w. loc.) in; (w. acc.) into -- in
рукахъ -- noun; feminine locative plural of <рѫка> hand -- (their) hands
бльщащася -- participle; masculine accusative plural of <бльштати сѧ, -штѫ сѧ, -штиши сѧ> shine, glisten; shine, be bright + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- glistening
акы -- conjunction; <акꙑ> as, like -- like
вода -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <вода> water -- the water

48 - И абꙇе вьсѣмъ весла отъ руку испадоша, и вьси отъ страха омьртвѣша.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- And
абꙇе -- adverb; <абьє> right away -- immediately
вьсѣмъ -- adjective used as substantive; masculine dative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- everyone's
весла -- noun; neuter nominative plural of <вєсло> oar -- the oars
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- from
руку -- noun; feminine genitive dual of <рѫка> hand -- hands
испадоша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <испасти, -падѫ, -падєши> fall out, turn out, fall down, slip out, escape -- slipped
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
вьси -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative plural of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- they all
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- with
страха -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <страхъ> shaking; terror -- fear
омьртвѣша -- verb; 3rd person plural aorist of <омрътвѣти, -вѣѭ, -вѣѥши> die -- froze

49 - И си видѣвъ блаженыи, разумѣвъ, яко хотять его убити.
 Collapse All
И -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
си -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter accusative plural of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- these things
видѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <видѣти, виждѫ, видиши> see -- saw # Note the use of the participle in place of a finite (conjugated) verb.
блаженыи -- adjective used as substantive; masculine nominative singular of <блажєнъ> blessed -- the blessed one
разумѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <разѹмѣти, -ѣѭ, -ѣѥши> come to know, find out, know; understand -- (and) understood
яко -- conjunction; <ꙗко> as, when; in order to; that; because; (introduces quotation) -- that
хотять -- verb; 3rd person plural present of <хотѣти, хоштѫ, хоштєши> want, wish -- they wanted # This verb shows present conjugations of both Class III and Class IV; cf. Section 42.
его -- pronoun; masculine genitive singular of <*и> he -- him
убити -- verb; infinitive of <ѹбити, -биѭ, -биѥши> kill -- to kill

50 - Възьрѣвъ къ нимъ умиленама очима и сльзами лице си умывая, съкрушенъмь сьрдцьмь, съмѣренъмь разумъмь и частыимь въздыханꙇемь вьсь сльзами разливаяся, а тѣлъмь утьрпая, жалостьно гласъ испущааше, "Не дѣите мене, братꙇя моя милая и драгая!
 Collapse All
Възьрѣвъ -- past participle; masculine nominative singular of <възрѣти, -зрѫ, -зриши> look closely at, gaze at; look up at (w. prep.) -- Having looked
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
нимъ -- pronoun; masculine dative plural of <*и> he -- them
умиленама -- adjective; feminine instrumental dual of <ѹмил҄єнъ> dejected, abject -- with pitiful # Note again the usage of feminine form of the adjective with the noun око, typically neuter.
очима -- noun; neuter instrumental dual of <око> eye -- eyes # Note the shift from the normal *s-stem очєс- to the stem ок-, here palatalized due to the ending. This particular form seems to be adopted from the *i-declension, and the agreement with the adjective suggests the grammatical gender has also shifted to feminine.
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
сльзами -- noun; feminine instrumental plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- with tears
лице -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <лицє> face, form -- face
си -- pronoun; dative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- his
умывая -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹмꙑвати, -ваѭ, -ваѥши> wash -- washing
съкрушенъмь -- past passive participle; neuter instrumental singular of <съкрѹшити, -шѫ, -шиши> run together, shatter, crush; strike, smite, strike together -- shattered
сьрдцьмь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <срьдьцє> heart -- with a... heart
съмѣренъмь -- past passive participle; masculine instrumental singular of <съмѣрити, -рѭ, -риши> lower, reduce, lessen, humble, abase -- dispirited
разумъмь -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <разѹмъ> understanding, sense, opinion, basic thought -- with... mind
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
частыимь -- adjective; neuter instrumental singular of <чѧстъ> dense -- deep
въздыханꙇемь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <въздꙑханьѥ> respiration, breathing; sigh, groan -- sighs
вьсь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <вьсь> all, every; whole -- all
сльзами -- noun; feminine instrumental plural of <слъза> tear, teardrop -- with tears
разливаяся -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <разливати, -аѭ, -аѥши> pour out + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- pouring himself... over
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- ...
тѣлъмь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular <тѣло> body -- in body # Note that this noun is originally an *s-stem, but here it shows the influence of the twofold, *o-stem declension.
утьрпая -- participle; masculine nominative singular of <ѹтръпати, -аѭ, -аѥши> grow stiff or useless, become torpid, become listless or inactive, become dull -- becoming weak
жалостьно -- adverb; neuter accusative singular of <жалостьнъ> sad -- sorrowfully
гласъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <гласъ> voice, sound, word -- a sound
испущааше -- verb; 3rd person singular imperfect of <испѹстити, -штѫ, -стиши> loose, free; send forth, send out, send away, emit -- he uttered
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
дѣите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <дѣꙗти, дѣѭ, дѣѥши> do, commit -- Do... touch
мене -- pronoun; genitive singular of <азъ> I -- me # Note genitive with negation; the preceding use of the pronoun, мѧ, shows the direct object (Olga) in the accusative
братꙇя -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers # Nominative singular used as vocative. Compare uses above.
моя -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
милая -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- poor
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- ...
драгая -- adjective; feminine nominative singular of <драгъ> dear, precious -- dear

51 - Не дѣите мене, ничто же вы зъла сътворивъша!
 Collapse All
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
дѣите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <дѣꙗти, дѣѭ, дѣѥши> do, commit -- Do... touch
мене -- pronoun; genitive singular of <азъ> I -- me # Note genitive with negation; the preceding use of the pronoun, мѧ, shows the direct object (Olga) in the accusative
ничто же -- indefinite pronoun; neuter accusative singular of <никътожє> no one, nobody -- no
вы -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
зъла -- adjective used as substantive; neuter genitive singular of <зълъ> evil, bad -- harm # Partitive genitive, denoting the whole of which ничто же selects a part.
сътворивъша -- past participle; masculine genitive singular of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- who (has)... done # Genitive, agreeing with мене.

52 - Не брезѣте мене, братꙇе и господье, не брезѣте!
 Collapse All
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- ...
брезѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <брѣшти, брѣгѫ, брѣжєши> be an object of care or thought, be a concern; (with negation) have no care for, be neglectful of, be careless, be negligent; look down upon, despise -- Let... be
мене -- pronoun; genitive singular of <азъ> I -- me # Note genitive with negation; the preceding use of the pronoun, мѧ, shows the direct object (Olga) in the accusative
братꙇе -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brothers
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
господье -- noun; masculine vocative plural of <господь> lord, master -- lords # Note the hallmark *i-stem plural.
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- ...
брезѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <брѣшти, брѣгѫ, брѣжєши> be an object of care or thought, be a concern; (with negation) have no care for, be neglectful of, be careless, be negligent; look down upon, despise -- let (me) be

53 - Кую обиду сътворихъ брату моему и вамъ, братꙇе и господье мои?
 Collapse All
Кую -- interrogative adjective; feminine accusative singular of <къи, коє, коꙗ> which?, what?; some, any -- What
обиду -- noun; feminine accusative singular of <обида> injustice, outrage, injury -- injustice
сътворихъ -- verb; 1st person singular aorist of <сътворити, -рѭ, -риши> do, make -- have I done
брату -- noun; masculine dative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- to... brother
моему -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
вамъ -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
братꙇе -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brethren
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
господье -- noun; masculine vocative plural of <господь> lord, master -- lords # Note the hallmark *i-stem plural.
мои -- adjective; masculine vocative plural of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

54 - Аще ли кая обида, ведѣте мя къ князю вашему, а къ моему брату и господину.
 Collapse All
Аще -- conjunction; <аштє> if, whether -- If
ли -- conjunction; <ли> or; whether -- ...
кая -- indefinite adjective; feminine nominative singular of <къи, коє, коꙗ> which?, what?; some, any -- (there is) some
обида -- noun; feminine nominative singular of <обида> injustice, outrage, injury -- injustice
ведѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <вєсти, вєдѫ, вєдєши> lead; lead off, lead away; carry; drag, draw -- lead
мя -- pronoun; accusative singular of <азъ> I -- me
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
князю -- noun; masculine dative singular of <кънѧзь> prince -- prince
вашему -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- and
къ -- preposition; <къ> (w. dat.) to, toward -- to
моему -- adjective; masculine dative singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
брату -- noun; masculine dative singular of <братръ, братъ> brother -- brother
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
господину -- noun; masculine dative singular of <господинъ> lord, master -- lord

55 - Помилуите уности моеѣ, помилуите, господье мои!
 Collapse All
Помилуите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <помиловати, -лѹѭ, -лѹѥши> pity, have mercy on -- Have mercy
уности -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <юность> youth, young age -- for... youth
моеѣ -- adjective; feminine genitive singular of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my
помилуите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <помиловати, -лѹѭ, -лѹѥши> pity, have mercy on -- have mercy
господье -- noun; masculine vocative plural of <господь> lord, master -- lords # Note the hallmark *i-stem plural.
мои -- adjective; masculine vocative plural of <мои, моє, моꙗ> my, mine -- my

56 - Вы ми будѣте господие, азъ вашь рабъ.
 Collapse All
Вы -- pronoun; nominative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- ...
ми -- pronoun; dative singular of <азъ> I -- my
будѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- Be
господие -- noun; masculine nominative plural of <господь> lord, master -- masters
азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- (and) I
вашь -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <вашь> of you, your (pl.) -- your
рабъ -- noun; masculine nominative singular of <рабъ> servant -- servant

57 - Не пожьнете мене, отъ житꙇя не съзьрѣла!
 Collapse All
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
пожьнете -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <пожѧти, -жьнѭ, -жьнѥши> mow, reap, cut off, gather, crop, harvest -- Do... cut... down
мене -- pronoun; genitive singular of <азъ> I -- me # Note genitive with negation; the preceding use of the pronoun, мѧ, shows the direct object (Olga) in the accusative
отъ -- preposition; <отъ> (w. gen.) of, from; by -- with
житꙇя -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <житьѥ> life -- age
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not (yet)
съзьрѣла -- past participle; masculine genitive singular of <съзрѣти, -зрѣѭ, -зрѣѥши> mature; produce -- having... ripened # Genitive in agreement with мене.

58 - Не пожьнѣте класа, не уже съзьрѣвъша, нъ млеко бєзълобꙇя носяща!
 Collapse All
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
пожьнѣте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <пожѧти, -жьнѭ, -жьнѥши> mow, reap, cut off, gather, crop, harvest -- Do... harvest
класа -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <класъ> ear of corn -- (this) ear of corn
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
уже -- adverb; <южє, ѹжє> already -- yet
съзьрѣвъша -- past participle; masculine genitive singular of <съзрѣти, -зрѣѭ, -зрѣѥши> mature; produce -- ripened
нъ -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- still
млеко -- noun; neuter accusative singular of <млѣко> milk -- the milk
бєзълобꙇя -- noun; neuter genitive singular of <бєзлобьѥ> innocence -- of innocence
носяща -- participle; masculine genitive singular of <носити, -шѫ, -сиши> carry; have -- bearing # Genitive, agreeing with класа.

59 - Не порѣжете лозы, не до коньца въздрастъша, а плодъ имуща!
 Collapse All
Не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
порѣжете -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <порѣзати, -заѭ, -заѥши> cut off (from life) -- Cut
лозы -- noun; feminine genitive singular of <лоза> twig, branch; grape-vine -- (this) vine
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not (yet)
до -- preposition; <до> (w. gen.) to, up to; (with numerals) about -- to
коньца -- noun; masculine genitive singular of <коньць> a coming to pass, performance, consummation; highest or farthest point; end, limit, boundary; pivot, axis -- term
въздрастъша -- past participle; feminine genitive singular of <въздрасти, -стѫ, -стєши> be nourished, grow -- having grown # Genitive, agreeing with лозы.
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- still
плодъ -- noun; masculine accusative singular of <плодъ> fruit -- fruit
имуща -- participle; feminine genitive singular of <имѣти, имамь, имаши> have, hold -- bearing # Genitive, agreeing with лозы

60 - Молю вы ся и милъ вы ся дѣю.
 Collapse All
Молю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <молити, -лѭ, -лиши> beseech, ask; pray -- I beseech
вы -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- you
ся -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- ...
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
милъ -- adjective; masculine nominative singular of <милъ> wretched, pitiable; excusable -- humble
вы -- pronoun; dative plural of <тꙑ> you, thou -- before you
ся -- pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- myself
дѣю -- verb; 1st person singular present of <дѣꙗти, дѣѭ, дѣѥши> do, commit -- ... # Literally, 'I make myself humble to you.'

61 - Убоитеся рекъшааго усты апостольскы, "не дѣти бывайте умы, зълобꙇемь же младеньствуите, а умы съвьршени бываите."
 Collapse All
Убоитеся -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative of <ѹбоꙗти сѧ, -боѭ сѧ, -боиши сѧ> fear, become afraid + pronoun; accusative singular of <сєбє> -self, oneself -- Heed
рекъшааго -- past participle; masculine genitive singular of <рєшти, рєкѫ, рєчєши> say, tell -- the one who... said
усты -- noun; neuter instrumental plural of <ѹста> (n. pl.) mouth, lips -- with the mouth
апостольскы -- adjective; neuter instrumental plural of <апостольскъ> of the apostle, apostle's, apostolic -- of the apostle # Cf. 1 Corinthians 14:20. The King James Version renders the passage as follows: "Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men."
не -- adverb; <нє> not -- not
дѣти -- noun; feminine nominative plural of <дѣть> children; (often pl.) infants, children -- children
бывайте -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative <бꙑвати, -ваѭ, -ваѥши> be -- Be
умы -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <ѹмъ> mind, reason, intellect -- in mind
зълобꙇемь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <злобьѥ> malice -- with malice
же -- conjunction; <жє> and, but -- rather
младеньствуите -- noun; 2nd person plural imperative of <младєньствовати, -вѹѭ, -вѹѥши> be a child -- be children
а -- conjunction; <а> and, but; if -- and
умы -- noun; masculine instrumental plural of <ѹмъ> mind, reason, intellect -- in mind
съвьршени -- past passive participle; masculine nominative plural of <съврьшити, -шѫ, -шиши> prepare, perfect, complete -- matured
бываите -- verb; 2nd person plural imperative <бꙑвати, -ваѭ, -ваѥши> be -- be

62 - Азъ, братꙇе, и зълобꙇемь и въздрастъмь еще младєньствую.
 Collapse All
Азъ -- pronoun; nominative singular of <азъ> I -- I
братꙇе -- noun; feminine vocative singular of <братьꙗ> (collective) brothers, brethren -- brethren
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- both
зълобꙇемь -- noun; neuter instrumental singular of <злобьѥ> malice -- in... malice
и -- conjunction; <и> and; also, too, even -- and
въздрастъмь -- noun; masculine instrumental singular of <въздрастъ> age -- age
еще -- adverb; <ѥщє> yet, still -- yet
младєньствую -- noun; 1st person singular present of <младєньствовати, -вѹѭ, -вѹѥши> be a child -- am... a child

63 - Се нѣсть убꙇйство, нъ сырорѣзанꙇе.
 Collapse All
Се -- demonstrative pronoun; neuter nominative singular of <сь, сє, си> this, this one -- this
нѣсть -- adverb; <нє> not + verb; 3rd person singular present of <бꙑти, бѫдѫ, бѫдєши> be, become -- is not
убꙇйство -- noun; neuter nominative singular of <ѹбийство> killing, murder -- murder
нъ -- conjunction; <нъ> but -- but
сырорѣзанꙇе -- noun; neuter nominative singular of <сꙑрорѣзаньѥ> (meaning unclear) child-killing? -- child-killing # Conjecture.

Lesson Text
43 - И сице ему стенющю и плачющюся, и сльзами землю омачающю, приспѣша вънезапу посъланꙇи отъ Святопълка, зълыя его слугы, немилостивꙇи кръвопꙇицѣ, братоненавидьници люти зѣло, сверѣпа звѣри душю имѣюще.

44 - Святыи же поиде въ кораблици, и срѣтоша и усть Смядины. 45 - И яко узьрѣ я святыи, въздрадовася душею, а они узьрѣвъше и омрачаахуся и гребяху къ нему. 46 - А съ цѣлованꙇя чаяаше отъ нихъ прꙇяти. 47 - И яко быша равьно пловуще, начаша скакати зълꙇи они въ лодꙇю его, обнажены меча имуще въ рукахъ, бльщащася, акы вода. 48 - И абꙇе вьсѣмъ весла отъ руку испадоша, и вьси отъ страха омьртвѣша. 49 - И си видѣвъ блаженыи, разумѣвъ, яко хотять его убити. 50 - Възьрѣвъ къ нимъ умиленама очима и сльзами лице си умывая, съкрушенъмь сьрдцьмь, съмѣренъмь разумъмь и частыимь въздыханꙇемь вьсь сльзами разливаяся, а тѣлъмь утьрпая, жалостьно гласъ испущааше, "Не дѣите мене, братꙇя моя милая и драгая! 51 - Не дѣите мене, ничто же вы зъла сътворивъша! 52 - Не брезѣте мене, братꙇе и господье, не брезѣте! 53 - Кую обиду сътворихъ брату моему и вамъ, братꙇе и господье мои? 54 - Аще ли кая обида, ведѣте мя къ князю вашему, а къ моему брату и господину. 55 - Помилуите уности моеѣ, помилуите, господье мои! 56 - Вы ми будѣте господие, азъ вашь рабъ. 57 - Не пожьнете мене, отъ житꙇя не съзьрѣла! 58 - Не пожьнѣте класа, не уже съзьрѣвъша, нъ млеко бєзълобꙇя носяща! 59 - Не порѣжете лозы, не до коньца въздрастъша, а плодъ имуща! 60 - Молю вы ся и милъ вы ся дѣю. 61 - Убоитеся рекъшааго усты апостольскы, "не дѣти бывайте умы, зълобꙇемь же младеньствуите, а умы съвьршени бываите." 62 - Азъ, братꙇе, и зълобꙇемь и въздрастъмь еще младєньствую. 63 - Се нѣсть убꙇйство, нъ сырорѣзанꙇе.
Translation
43 And while he was mourning and weeping so, wetting the ground with his tears, the dispatch from Svjatopolk suddenly approached, his evil servants, a bloodthirsty, unmerciful (group), an exceedingly ferocious (bunch of) brother-haters, possessing the soul of a wild beast.
44 And the holy one set out in the caravel, and they met him at the mouth of the Smjadina. 45 And as the holy one caught sight of them, he rejoiced in his soul; but as they saw him, they grew dark and rowed toward him. 46 He expected to receive greetings from them. 47 But as they sailed up alongside, those evil men began to leap into his boat, holding in their hands unsheathed swords, glistening like the water. 48 And immediately the oars slipped from everyone's hands, and they all froze with fear. 49 The blessed one saw these things, and understood that they wanted to kill him. 50 Having looked to them with pitiful eyes, and washing his face with tears, with a shattered heart, with dispirited mind, with deep sighs, pouring himself all over with tears, becoming weak in body, sorrowfully he uttered a sound, "Do not touch me, my poor, dear brothers! 51 Do not touch me, who has done you no harm! 52 Let me be, brothers and lords, let me be! 53 What injustice have I done to my brother and you, my brethren and lords? 54 If there is some injustice, then lead me to your prince, and to my brother and lord. 55 Have mercy for my youth, have mercy, my lords! 56 Be my masters, and I your servant. 57 Do not cut me down, having not yet ripened with age! 58 Do not harvest this ear of corn, not yet ripened, still bearing the milk of innocence! 59 Cut not this vine, not yet having grown to term, still bearing fruit! 60 I beseech you and humble myself before you. 61 Heed the one who, with the mouth of the apostle, said, 'Be not children in mind, rather be children with malice, and be matured in mind.' 62 I, brethren, am yet a child in both malice and age. 63 This is not murder, but child-killing."
Grammar
46 Invariable Verbal Forms
46.1 Infinitive & Supine
The infinitive and supine are verbal nouns. The infinitive takes the ending -ти and generally corresponds to the 'to X' form of a verb 'X' in English: for example to do, the infinitive form of the verb do. The supine takes the ending -тъ and in general corresponds to 'in order to X' for a verb 'X' in English. These forms are frozen, invariable forms: they do not change depending on function or grammatical relationships within a clause.

As the endings of the infinitive and supine are affixed to various verbal stems, the final phonemes of those stems frequently undergo phonetic changes. The following chart lists the most common changes, along with illustrative examples.

Articulation	 	Shift	 	Early CS	 	Late CS	 	Old Russian	 	OCS	 	Meaning
Velar	 	*-k-ti > -чи	 	 	 	*tek-ti	 	тєчи	 	тєшти	 	to flow
 	 	*-g-ti > -чи	 	 	 	*mog-ti	 	мочи	 	мошти	 	to be able
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Dental	 	*-t-ti > -сти	 	 	 	*met-ti	 	мєсти	 	мєсти	 	to throw
 	 	*-d-ti > -сти	 	 	 	*sěd-ti	 	сѣсти	 	сѣсти	 	to sit
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Labial	 	*-p-ti > -ти	 	 	 	*sup-ti	 	сути	 	сѹти	 	to heap up
 	 	*-b-ti > -ти	 	 	 	*greb-ti	 	грєти	 	грєти	 	to bury
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Glide	 	*-v-ti > -ти	 	 	 	*živ-ti	 	жити	 	жити	 	to live
 	 	*-j-ti > -ти	 	 	 	*ob-uj-ti	 	об-ути	 	об-ѹти	 	to put shoes on
 	 	*-ĭj-ti > -ити	 	 	 	*bĭj-ti	 	бити	 	бити	 	to beat
 	 	*-ŭj-ti > -ыти	 	 	 	*mŭj-ti	 	мыти	 	мꙑти	 	to wash
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Nasal	 	*-ĭm-ti > -яти	 	*vŭz-ĭm-ti	 	*vŭz-ę-ti	 	въз-яти	 	въз-ѧти	 	to take
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
TorT	 	*TerT > TereT	 	 	 	*mer-ti	 	мєрєти	 	мрѣти	 	to die
With the supine, the change *-k-t- > -č- generally fronts the following back jer -ъ to -ь. Thus the supine of тєчи 'to flow' would be тєчь, with final front jer. Similarly for the shift *-g-t- > -č-.

Where the above chart shows a shift resulting simply in -ти, this signifies that the preceding phoneme suffered deletion. For example the shift *-p-ti > -ти shows that a root-final *-p was deleted before the infinitive ending. In the rows illustrating the phonetic changes undergone by the glides, we see that final *-v- and *-j- are lost before the infinitive and supine suffixes, except when -j- is preceded by a jer. In this scenario, the presence of the glide leads to tense position for the preceding jer and the typical shift encountered in tense position. Note also that the final row displaying the shift for TerT combinations is meant to be illustrative of all TorT-style shifts, as discussed in Section 7.3.

The infinitive derives from an original Indo-European nominal formation in *-ti-, generally used to create abstract nouns from verbs. Compare Sansrkit prajn'atis and Greek gno:sis (-sis from earlier -tis) with Old Russian and OCS abstract noun познать 'knowledge' built from the same abstract formation. The particular shape of the Slavic infinitive derives from the dative form of this abstract noun: *-tej > -ти in Old Russian and OCS.

As a noun, the infinitive generally provides a complement to some other finite verb form. The exact nature of the complement may vary: the infinitive may denote purpose, necessity, possibility, etc. The subject of the main verb of the clause is often understood as the subject of the infinitive: нъ хощю вы почьстити 'I want to honor you' (Primary Chronicle), where the subject I of the verb хощю is understood also as subject of the infinitive почьстити. When the subject of the infinitive differs from the subject of the main verb, Old Russian typically puts the subject of the infinitive in the dative case: тѣхъ бо пророци прорицаху яко Богу родитися 'For their prophets prophecied that God was to be born' (Primary Chronicle). The direct object of the infinitive, by contrast, generally takes the accusative as with any finite verb; when the verb is negated, this object is frequently cast in the genitive. In addition Old Russian frequently employs the infinitive in impersonal constructions which have the force of a command. For example: свинины нє ясти и вина нє пити 'One should not eat pork nor drink wine' (Primary Chronicle), but more literally 'it is not to eat pork and to drink wine'. Here свинины and вина are direct objects of the respective infinitives, but they take the genitive case as a result of the negation.

The supine derives from an original Indo-European nominal formation in *-tu-. Compare Latin adven-tus 'coming, arrival', an abstract noun built to the Latin verb ad-veni:re 'to come, arrive'. As the Latin supine corresponds to the accusative case of this nominal construction (Lat. adventum), so too does the suffix -тъ of the Old Russian supine, with loss of the final consonant and reduction of the short *-u.

As a frozen accusative, the supine finds a natural use as a direct object or as the destination of directed motion. In fact within Old Russian the supine quickly became specialized as a manner of expressing a goal with finite verbs expressing or implying motion. For example, we find in the Primary Chronicle: посъла Ольгъ мужа своя построитъ мира 'Oleg sent his men in order to arrange peace...'. Whereas the infinitive generally takes the direct object in the accusative (in the absence of negation), we see with this example the general tendency of Old Russian to place the object of the action denoted by the supine in the genitive, regardless of whether the action is negated or not. From the perspective of English, this becomes natural if we make sure to highlight the original nominal character of the supine. For example we may rephrase the last example as follows to elicit a parallel construction with the object in the genitive in English: 'Oleg sent his men for the arranging of peace'.

Thus the uniqueness of the supine lies not in the structure of its arguments, i.e. how its objects are denoted. Its novelty lies instead in providing a formal accusative (superficially a 'direct object', though not all accusatives need be direct objects) for verbs which are typically intransitive, namely verbs of motion: приходиша отъ Рима ѹцитъ васъ 'they came from Rome in order to teach you', or more literally '... for the teaching of you'. Here the verb приходиша 'they came' is intransitive and so cannot take a direct object. But fundamentally the supine, as an accusative, does not denote the direct object; rather it denotes the goal of the motion (cf. the discussion of the original senses of the accusative in Section 3).

46.2 The Gerund
Old Russian texts display numerous instances in which the present participle does not agree with its referent in some combination of gender, case, or number. One of the clearest examples of this comes in the Primary Chronicle's story of Olga's Revenge: идуще же єму въспѧть размꙑсливъ рече дружинѣ своєи 'Having gone back (and) having considered he said to his retinue...'. Here we find the nominative plural masculine form идуще of the present participle where we would expect the dative singular masculine идущу to modify єму in a dative absolute (which nevertheless is not absolute, since єму refers to the subject of рече). Consider also the following passage from the Igor Tale: здрави князи, и дружина, побарая за христьаны на поганыя полки 'May the princes, and the retinue, prosper fighting for the Christians against the pagan troops'. Here the masculine nominative singular побарая 'fighting' modifies the masculine plural князи 'the princes', and simultaneously the feminine nominative singular дружина 'the retinue'. Such frozen forms become ever more common as time marches on. Though other forms occur, when we find such a mismatch between the present participle and its referent, most frequently the participle shows the masculine nominative form, singular or plural. This provides the point of departure for what in modern Russian grammars is termed the gerund, a sort of adverbial usage of the participle. Such gerunds provide a background action without demanding agreement of gender, number, or case. Some verbs so frequently fill this role that, much later in the language, the gerund takes on the role of a simple conjunction: e.g. хотя 'although', in origin the gerund based on the present participle of хотѣти 'to want, wish'.

47 The Fifth Conjugation
The fifth conjugation, almost paradoxically, comprises a marginal class of critical verbs. The verbs which belong to Class V derive from verbs originally athematic in the present tense. By athematic we mean that no thematic vowel (either *-e- or *-o-) intervened between root and ending: the endings were affixed directly to the verbal root itself, or a suffixed extension thereof. The athematic conjugation was already ceding ground to the increasingly pervasive thematic conjugation within Common Slavic itself, and even to some extent within the parent Proto-Indo-European. It seems that the centrality of the Class V verbs within the lexicon -- encompassing such notions as 'be', 'give', 'see', and 'eat' -- assisted their retention into the historical period and beyond.

Perhaps the most unique feature of the fifth conjugation as a whole is the characteristic first person singular desinence of the present tense: -мь, from an original PIE *-mĭ as evidenced in Greek dido:mi and Sanskrit dada:mi, both 'I give' and reduplicated presents built to the same root which gives Old Russian дамь 'I give'. In fact, the stem дад- of дати 'to give' is itself reduplicated, meaning that the initial consonant of the root, together with a vowel, were prefixed to the root itself much as any other verbal prefix within Old Russian. This reduplication, however, dates back to the proto-language and was no longer a productive verbal formation even within Common Slavic. However the fact that the stem was formed via reduplication and therefore resulted in a stem-final -д- within Common Slavic had important implications for the conjugation of this particular verb: though the final -д- drops before a following -м- or -с-, the stem-final -д- becomes -с- before -т-. This leads to the stem-final -с- characteristic of several forms, such as дасть 'he gives' and дастє 'you (pl.) give'. The stem-final -д- is retained before vowels, as in дадять 'they give', from CS *dad-nti > *dad-ętĭ > Old Russian дадять, but OCS дадѧтъ.

The same changes found between the stem of дати 'to give' and the following desinence occur also in the verb ѣсти 'to eat', with stem ѣд-, and in вѣдѣти 'to see', with stem вѣд-. We list the changes in the following table for convenience.

Shift	 	Early CS	 	Late CS	 	Old Russian	 	OCS	 	Meaning
*-d-t- > -ст-	 	*dad-ti	 	*dastĭ	 	дасть	 	дастъ	 	he gives
*-d-s- > -с-	 	*dad-si:	 	*dassi	 	даси	 	даси	 	thou givest
*-d-m- > -м-	 	*dad-mus	 	*dadmŭ	 	дамъ	 	дамъ	 	we give
The verb быти 'to be' shows numerous idiosyncrasies. The present stem itself is ѥс-. This derives from PIE *Hes-, with initial laryngeal. The zero-grade of this PIE root is therefore *Hs-. Though the laryngeal was not retained into Common Slavic, the resulting structure of the root interacted notably with the athematic endings. Compare in the following chart the evolution of the full- and zero-grade forms as exhibited by the first person singular and third person plural.

PIE	 	Early CS	 	Late CS	 	Old Russian	 	OCS	 	Meaning
*Hes-mi	 	*es-mi	 	*jesmĭ	 	ѥсмь	 	ѥсмь	 	I am
*Hs-nti	 	*s-onti	 	*sǫtĭ	 	суть	 	сѫтъ	 	they are
We see that in the third person plural, the zero-grade of the root left the root-final *-s- as the initial element of the verb form itself, and the nasal of the ending *-nti, helped by the insertion of a thematic vowel, provided the vocalic element. This explains the unique shape of the third person plural form суть. The same process applies to the present active participle. Moreover, the initial є- of the majority of the present forms combined with the final -є of the negative particle нє to give the vowel -ѣ- in the majority of the negated forms such as нѣсть 'is not'. This coalescence of vowels did not occur in the third person plural, however, due to the lack of a verb-initial -є, and so the resulting form is нєсуть 'they are not'. The reader must take care to distinguish this form from the third person plural нєсуть 'they carry' from the verb нєсти 'to carry'.

The verb быти 'to be' is the only Old Russian verb to have a separate future-tense stem: буд-. The stem takes the endings proper to the thematic verbal conjugations. Thus буду 'I will be', etc.

In addition the verb быти 'to be' shows two different formations of the imperfect, as well as two different formations of the aorist. Some scholars label the forms бѣахъ, etc., the imperfective imperfect, while the forms будяахъ, etc., receive the label perfective imperfect. The terminology derives from the fact that, across much of Slavic, the perfective verbal aspect typically denotes the future in the absence of a separate morphological future tense. Since the stem буд- serves as the future of быти 'to be', the imperfect built from that stem naturally falls under the heading of perfective. By analogy, the aorist forms бѣхъ, etc., fall under the heading of imperfective aorist, and so the forms быхъ, etc., receive the title perfective aorist.

The verb ѣсти 'to eat' shows two stems in the aorist: a long stem ѣд- and a short stem я-. There seems to be no clear distinction of perfectivity or imperfectivity between the two stems.

The following chart lists the forms of the Class V verbs: быти 'to be', дати 'to give', вѣдѣти 'to see', and ѣсти 'to eat'.

Class V	 	ѥс-	 	дад-	 	вѣд-	 	ѣд-
Present	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	ѥсмь, ѥсми	 	дамь, дами	 	вѣдѣ, вѣмь, вѣми	 	ѣмь, ѣми
2	 	ѥси	 	даси	 	вѣси	 	ѣси
3	 	ѥсть	 	дасть	 	вѣсть	 	ѣсть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	ѥсвѣ	 	давѣ	 	вѣвѣ	 	ѣвѣ
2	 	ѥста	 	даста	 	вѣста	 	ѣста
3	 	ѥста	 	даста	 	вѣста	 	ѣста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	ѥсмъ	 	дамъ	 	вѣмъ	 	ѣмъ
2	 	ѥстє	 	дастє	 	вѣстє	 	ѣстє
3	 	суть	 	дадять, дадуть	 	вѣдять	 	ѣдять
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Negative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	нѣсмь, нѣсми	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	нѣси	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	нѣсть	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	нѣсвѣ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	нѣста	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	нѣста	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	нѣсмъ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	нѣстє	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	нєсуть	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Future	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	буду	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будєши, будєшь	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будєть	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	будєвѣ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будєта	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будєта	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	будємъ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будєтє	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будуть	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будь, буди	 	дажь	 	вѣжь	 	ѣжь, ѣжи
3	 	будь, буди	 	дажь	 	вѣжь	 	ѣжь, ѣжи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	будѣвѣ	 	дадивѣ	 	вѣдивѣ	 	ѣдивѣ
2	 	будѣта	 	дадита	 	вѣдита	 	ѣдита
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	будѣмъ	 	дадимъ	 	вѣдимъ	 	ѣдимъ
2	 	будѣтє	 	дадитє	 	вѣдитє	 	ѣдитє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	сы	 	дада	 	вѣда	 	ѣда
Fem. N	 	сучи	 	дадучи	 	вѣдучи	 	ѣдучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	дадомъ	 	вѣдомъ, вѣдимъ	 	ѣдомъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect I	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	бѣахъ	 	дадяахъ	 	вѣдяахъ	 	ѣдяхъ
2	 	бѣашє	 	дадяашє	 	вѣдяашє	 	ѣдяшє
3	 	бѣашє	 	дадяашє	 	вѣдяашє	 	ѣдяшє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	бѣаховѣ	 	дадяаховѣ	 	вѣдяаховѣ	 	ѣдяховѣ
2	 	бѣашєта	 	дадяашєта	 	вѣдяашєта	 	ѣдяшєта
3	 	бѣашєта	 	дадяашєта	 	вѣдяашєта	 	ѣдяшєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	бѣахомъ	 	дадяахомъ	 	вѣдяахомъ	 	ѣдяхомъ
2	 	бѣашєтє	 	дадяашєтє	 	вѣдяашєтє	 	ѣдяшєтє
3	 	бѣаху	 	дадяаху	 	вѣдяаху	 	ѣдяху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect II	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	будяахъ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будяашє	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будяашє	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	будяаховѣ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будяашєта	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будяашєта	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	будяахомъ	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	будяашєтє	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	будяаху	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist I	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	бѣхъ	 	дахъ	 	вѣдѣхъ	 	ѣдохъ
2	 	бѣ	 	да, дасть	 	вѣдѣ	 	ѣстъ
3	 	бѣ	 	да, дасть	 	вѣдѣ, вѣстъ	 	ѣстъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	бѣховѣ	 	даховѣ	 	вѣдѣховѣ	 	ѣдоховѣ
2	 	бѣста	 	даста	 	вѣдѣста	 	ѣдоста
3	 	бѣста	 	даста	 	вѣдѣста	 	ѣдоста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	бѣхомъ	 	дахомъ	 	вѣдѣхомъ	 	ѣдохомъ
2	 	бѣстє	 	дастє	 	вѣдѣстє	 	ѣдостє
3	 	бѣша	 	даша	 	вѣдѣша	 	ѣдоша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist II	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	быхъ	 	-	 	-	 	яхъ
2	 	бы, бысть	 	-	 	-	 	-
3	 	бы, бысть	 	-	 	-	 	я
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	быховѣ	 	-	 	-	 	яховѣ
2	 	быста	 	-	 	-	 	яста
3	 	быста	 	-	 	-	 	яста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	быхомъ	 	-	 	-	 	яхомъ
2	 	быстє	 	-	 	-	 	ястє
3	 	быша	 	-	 	-	 	яша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	бывъ	 	давъ	 	вѣдѣвъ	 	ѣдъ
Fem. N	 	бывъши	 	давъши	 	вѣдѣвъши	 	ѣдъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	былъ	 	далъ	 	вѣдѣлъ	 	ѣлъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	данъ	 	вѣдѣнъ	 	ѣдєнъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	быти	 	дати	 	вѣдѣти	 	ѣсти
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	-	 	датъ	 	вѣдѣтъ	 	ѣстъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	-	 	даньѥ	 	вѣдѣньѥ	 	-
48 'Have' & 'Take' Verbs
Three verbs provide a perennial source of confusion for learners of Old Russian and Old Church Slavonic. The confusion arises not only from the similarity of their forms, but also from the overlap in their meanings: имѣти 'to have'; имати 'to have, take'; яти 'to take, seize'. Adding to the confusion is the fact that two of the three verbs form the present tense in two distinct ways. Consider the following chart.

Infinitive	 	Meaning	 	1 Sg. Pres. I	 	2 Sg. Pres. I	 	1 Sg. Pres. II	 	2 Sg. Pres. II
имѣти	 	have	 	имамь	 	имаши	 	имѣю	 	имѣѥши
имати	 	have, take	 	ѥмлю	 	ѥмлѥши	 	имаю	 	имаѥши
яти	 	take, seize	 	иму	 	имєши	 	 	 	 
The verb имѣти 'to have' shows in the form имамь the hallmark of conjugation according to Class V, while the alternate form имѣю shows the signs of the Class III conjugation with the thematic vowel preceded by the palatal glide. The verb имати 'to have, take' likewise shows the characteristics of Class III conjugation in both present conjugations, ѥмлю and имаю, though the latter adds a suffix to the basic root which is absent in the former. Finally яти forms its present, иму, etc., according to Class IA.

The explanation for the similarity in form and meaning lies in the fact that all three verbs, while separate within Old Russian, derive from the same Proto-Indo-European root: PIE *Hem- 'take', cf. Latin emere 'buy'. In Common Slavic the root became *ĭm-. In initial position the front jer developed a palatal on-glide, *jĭm-, and in early Slavic orthography the only available spelling was им-. To this were added various suffixes to derive secondary verbs имѣти 'to have' and имати 'to have, take'. Adding the infinitive ending directly to the root resulted in the evolution CS *ĭm-ti > *ę-ti > *jęti > Old Russian яти, OCS ѩти 'to take, seize'. Moreover the palatal glide which precedes the thematic vowel of Class III verb softens the *-m-, so that *jem-je-ši, showing full grade of the root, becomes ѥмлѥши.

The following table provides a reference for distinguishing the forms of these closely related verbs.

'Have, Take'	 	имѣ-	 	има-	 	им-
Meaning	 	have	 	have, take	 	take, seize
Present I	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	имамь	 	ѥмлю	 	иму
2	 	имаши	 	ѥмлѥши	 	имєши
3	 	имать	 	ѥмлѥть	 	имєть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имавѣ	 	ѥмлѥвѣ	 	имєвѣ
2	 	имата	 	ѥмлѥта	 	имєта
3	 	имата	 	ѥмлѥта	 	имєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имамъ	 	ѥмлѥмъ	 	имємъ
2	 	иматє	 	ѥмлѥтє	 	имєтє
3	 	имуть	 	ѥмлють	 	имуть
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Present II	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	имѣю	 	имаю	 	-
2	 	имѣѥши	 	имаѥши	 	-
3	 	имѣѥть	 	имаѥть	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имѣѥвѣ	 	имаѥвѣ	 	-
2	 	имѣѥта	 	имаѥта	 	-
3	 	имѣѥта	 	имаѥта	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имѣѥмъ	 	имаѥмъ	 	-
2	 	имѣѥтє	 	имаѥтє	 	-
3	 	имѣють	 	имають	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperative	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	-	 	-	 	-
2	 	имѣи	 	-	 	ими
3	 	имѣи	 	-	 	ими
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имѣивѣ	 	-	 	имѣвѣ
2	 	имѣита	 	-	 	имѣта
3	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имѣимъ	 	-	 	имѣмъ
2	 	имѣитє	 	-	 	имѣтє
3	 	-	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	има	 	ѥмля	 	(въз)-ьма
Fem. N	 	имучи	 	ѥмлючи	 	(въз)-ьмучи
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Act. Part. II	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	имѣа	 	-	 	-
Fem. N	 	имѣучи	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Pres. Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	-	 	-	 	имомъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect I	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	имяахъ	 	-	 	имяахъ
2	 	имяашє	 	-	 	имяашє
3	 	имяашє	 	-	 	имяашє
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имяаховѣ	 	-	 	имяаховѣ
2	 	имяашєта	 	-	 	имяашєта
3	 	имяашєта	 	-	 	имяашєта
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имяахомъ	 	-	 	имяахомъ
2	 	имяашєтє	 	-	 	имяашєтє
3	 	имяаху	 	-	 	имяаху
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Imperfect II	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	имѣахъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	имѣашє	 	-	 	-
3	 	имѣашє	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имѣаховѣ	 	-	 	-
2	 	имѣашєта	 	-	 	-
3	 	имѣашєта	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имѣахомъ	 	-	 	-
2	 	имѣашєтє	 	-	 	-
3	 	имѣаху	 	-	 	-
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
New Aorist	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Sg.	 	имѣхъ	 	-	 	яхъ
2	 	имѣ	 	-	 	я, ятъ
3	 	имѣ	 	-	 	я, ятъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Du.	 	имѣховѣ	 	-	 	яховѣ
2	 	имѣста	 	-	 	яста
3	 	имѣста	 	-	 	яста
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
1 Pl.	 	имѣхомъ	 	-	 	яхомъ
2	 	имѣстє	 	-	 	ястє
3	 	имѣша	 	-	 	яша
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Act. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc./Neut. N	 	имѣвъ	 	имавъ	 	имъ, явъ
Fem. N	 	имѣвъши	 	имавъши	 	имъши
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Resultative Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	имѣлъ	 	ималъ	 	ялъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Past Pass. Part.	 	 	 	 	 	 
Masc. N	 	имѣнъ	 	-	 	ятъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Infinitive	 	имѣти	 	имати	 	яти
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Supine	 	имѣтъ	 	иматъ	 	ятъ
 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Verbal Noun	 	имѣньѥ	 	иманьѥ	 	ятьѥ
49 Verb Use: Past
Contrary to the non-past paradigm, of which Old Russian exhibits only one formation, the past tense paradigm shows two distinct formations: the aorist and imperfect. As with the non-past, these formations are morphological categories. Each category employs a special set of verbal endings. These endings carry different information for the two different categories: though they both mark an action as happening in past time, and hence are past tenses, the depiction of the action's evolution over time differs between the two. We discuss these differences in more detail below.

49.1 The Aorist Tense
In Old Russian the morphology of the aorist tense provides a simple past tense. First and foremost, the aorist is a past tense, and therefore marks an event as having happened before the time frame of the utterance. But the aorist combines the notion of past time with a secondary connotation: use of the aorist marks that an event occurred, but it foregoes any implications as to whether the actual event involved a period of time over which it evolved, whether it was instantaneous, or any other connotation as to its temporal profile. This parallels the English simple past, as in the use of ate in I ate my dinner. In this phrase the verb does not point to the process by which the dinner was eaten; it does not elaborate as to whether the process took place over time or was nearly instantaneous. Within scholarly discussions one often finds the aorist described as marking events in "point-like" fashion; this in contrast to the imperfect, where there is some connotation of (perhaps line-like) extent in time. Consider the following examples of the aorist as a simple past.

и абие усъпе, прєдавъ душю свою въ руцѣ бога жива 'and immediately he passed away, having conferred his soul into the hands of the living God' (Boris & Gleb).
и начаша глаголати стояще округъ его 'and they began to speak, standing around him' (Boris & Gleb). The aorist of начати 'to begin' focuses the narrative on the moment of inception of conversation, while the meaning of the infinitive глаголати 'to speak' adds the context of the ensuing discussion.
сє кънязя убихомъ русьскаго 'Lo, we killed the Russian prince' (Olga's Revenge).
Because of this simple, point-like view of events, authors of Old Russian narrative texts often use the aorist to order a sequence of events: with proper adverbs and connectives, authors employ the aorist to denote which event happened first, second, etc. Consider the following examples of the aorist to narrate a sequence of events.

и пусти дружину свою домови, съ малъмь же дружины възвратися, желая больша имѣния 'and he sent his retinue home, but he turned back with a small part of his retinue, desiring more possessions' (Death of Igor).
и възъва я ольга къ собѣ, и рече имъ 'and Olga summoned them before her, and said to them' (Olga's Revenge).
The point-like nature of the aorist, combined with the fact that it is a past tense, imply that the event denoted by the aorist has been completed before the time of the utterance, or before the time frame established by context. However in some instances of aorist usage, context would seem to dictate that the emphasis is on the present result of the completed action denoted by the aorist. In such instances the aorist seems to overlap in sense with the perfect, or when the context appears to be in past time, with the pluperfect. Consider the following examples in which the aorist seems to serve as perfect or pluperfect.

и повѣдаша ользѣ яко древляне придоша 'and they announced to Olga that the Derevlians had arrived' (Olga's Revenge).
и рѣша древляне придохомъ кънягыне 'and the Derevlians said, "We have arrived, princess"' (Olga's Revenge).
49.2 The Imperfect Tense
Like the aorist tense, the Old Russian imperfect tense is a morphological past tense. But in contrast to the aorist, which marks events without reference to their extent in time, a secondary connotation of the imperfect in Old Russian is that the action in question extended over a period of time. Thus the imperfect tense both places an action in past time and makes explicit reference to its extent in past time. This parallels English usage of the continuous past, as with the verb was eating in the sentence I was eating my dinner. Consider the following examples of the imperfect tense denoting a continuous, extended event.

да елико слышаху словеса его, отъ сльзъ не можааху ни словесе рещи 'for as long as they were listening to his words, they were not able to utter a word' (Boris & Gleb).
нъ сь кыи къняжаше въ родѣ своемь 'but this Kyi was ruling among his own people' (Primary Chronicle).
имаху дань варязи изъ заморья на чюди 'the Varangians were taking tribute from across the sea among the Chuds' (Invitation to the Varangians).
The imperfect also finds a use in denoting repeated past-time events. That is, some events by their nature or by context are of short duration. With such actions the imperfect may mark a period in past time in which the short-duration events recurred numerous (though usually an unspecified number of) times. This is akin to the use of the continuous past in English phrases like For years I was signing my name illegibly. Each particular signature was an action of short duration, and so the overall connotation of such an expression is that the speaker repeatedly signed his or her name illegibly. This also overlaps with English usage of the collocation used to to denote a past action which was customary over a period of time: I always used to sign my name illegibly. Consider the following examples of the Old Russian imperfect denoting repeated past events.

тѣмь глаголаху на перевозъ на кыєвъ 'for this (reason) they would say "to Kyi's Ferry"' (Primary Chronicle). Here it would be difficult to interpret the action as one continuous event over an extended period of time. The notion of uttering a specific phrase seems to demand that the imperfect be interpreted as representing an action that occurred on several distinct occasions over an extended period of time.
боянъ бо вѣщꙇй, аще кому хотяше пѣснь творити, то растєкашется мыслꙇю по дрєву 'for wise Bojan, if he wanted to compose a song for someone, would flit around with his thought in the tree' (Igor Tale).
Finally we occasionally find that Old Russian uses the imperfect to mark a hypothetical situation, often contrary to fact. This may occur where Old Russian might otherwise employ the conditional-optative construction, as discussed in Section 27. As in that section, we see in Old Russian the tendency to replace irrealis moods by past indicatives. This parallels English, where for example the pluperfect finds use in contrafactual statements: If only I had called ahead.... Note the following example of the use of the imperfect for a hypothetical construction: не лѣпо ли ны бяшеть, братꙇе, начати старыми словєсы трудныхъ повѣстꙇй о полку игоревѣ, игоря святъславича 'Would it not be fitting, brothers, to begin with the ancient words of the toilsome exploits concerning the Igorian troop, of Igor son of Svjatoslav?' (Igor Tale).

50 Verbal Aspect
In our discussion of the past tenses in Old Russian (Section 49) we only told half the story. When we said that the aorist and imperfect are past tenses, this is only half right. In fact they are morphological categories each of which combines two logically independent grammatical features: tense and aspect. Tense, as we have mentioned, is the grammatical feature which places events in time relative to the moment of utterance. With tense we make distinctions of present, past, and future. Tense places events relative to one another on a timeline. Aspect, by contrast, is a completely separate notion, which we will discuss briefly below.

Aspect denotes what many scholars term the shape of the action, or its temporal profile. To see these contrasts in practice, let us consider some examples from English. In particular we focus on events in the past tense: English distinguishes between certain aspects most clearly in the past tense, and by fixing the tense we can remove tense as a factor in our considerations of aspect. When we say I floated, we describe the past action of floating in a way that says nothing about the temporal extent of the process: we consider the event as a single point on the timeline. By contrast, when we say I was floating, we are also describing a past action; but this time the use of the past continuous form was floating makes specific reference to the fact that the event occurred over a period of time. We may imagine that, rather than identifying a point on the timeline, this identifies an interval of time. In fact this particular form does not make clear whether the action has ceased or not by the time of the utterance, whereas I floated makes clear that the event began and ended all prior to the moment of utterance. In the parlance of aspect, we say that I floated describes the event with perfective aspect, while I was floating describes the event with imperfective aspect. The morphology of English signals a change of aspect: the simple past expresses perfective aspect, while the continuous past expresses imperfective aspect. We may apply this morphology to any verb: I bought (the car) (perfective) vs. I was buying (the car) (imperfective). Note that in the phrase I was buying the car, it is unclear whether the purchase was actually concluded or not, while the phrase I bought the car makes it clear that ownership of the automobile did in fact change hands.

But aspect need not be signaled simply by morphology. Aspect can be a characteristic proper to the inherent meaning of a word, so-called lexical aspect. For example, English shoot is necessarily perfective lexically: by its very nature the verb describes an instantaneous action, where beginning and end of an individual instance of the action are so tightly bound as to be imagined almost as co-occurring. Being an English verb, however, we may conjugate it however we like: in the past tense we may say either I shot or I was shooting. The simple past I shot employs the morphologically perfective form that coincides with the lexical aspect of the verb to relate a single, past-time instance of the action. However the continuous past I was shooting mixes morphological imperfectivity with lexical perfectivity to arrive at a unique combination: I was shooting denotes a sequence of individually perfective actions, one shot after another over an extended period of time. Compare this to the English verb redden, which is not inherently perfective. We may use either past tense conjugation, either Her cheeks reddened or Her cheeks were reddening, with no special change of interpretation between the two different morphological aspects.

The Old Russian aorist and imperfect are both past tenses, but the distinction between the two is one of aspect: they parallel the English simple and continuous pasts, respectively. But as with the preceding examples, they can interact with the lexical aspect of roots to lead to more intricate interpretations. Moreover, Slavic in general, and Old Russian in particular, possessed means of modifying the actual lexical aspect of verbs via changes of suffixes and prefixes, thus allowing the possibility for any verb to have two associated lexical entries, one inherently perfective (like English shoot), the other inherently imperfective (like English redden). We discuss some of these modifications below.

50.1 Aspect Morphology
Old Russian displays numerous morphological features which allow the language to modify the aspect of a given verbal root. One method employs the addition of suffixes to the verbal root, and in this Old Russian displays a tendency common to many of the Indo-European languages. In the literature on Slavic languages scholars tend to call this process derivation, and typically the result is that the suffixed verb shows imperfective aspect where the original root shows perfective aspect. Another mechanism by which Old Russian modifies aspect, and one which grows into an ever more robust and pervasive system as we approach modern Russian, is that of prefixation. Typically the addition of a verbal prefix will result in a perfective verb where the root is originally imperfective. The following table displays different types of aspectual correspondences (Schenker, 1995).

Type	 	Imperfective Type	 	Perfective Type	 	Imperfective Example	 	Perfective Example	 	Meaning
Prefixal	 	Unprefixed	 	Prefixed	 	ljub-i-	 	vŭz-ljub-i-	 	love
Derived	 	Unprefixed derived	 	Unprefixed	 	pust'-a-j-	 	pust-i-	 	release
Combined	 	Prefixed derived	 	Prefixed	 	u-stup-a-j-	 	u-stup-i-	 	retreat
Discussions of perfectivity in the context of modern Russian often allude to the fact that a perfective action, inasmuch as it is viewed as a complete whole with beginning and end included, is incongruous with the notion of a continuous present tense: something that is ongoing at the time of utterance by definition has not finished, and so cannot be viewed as a completed whole. This provides a logical point of departure for a feature of modern Russian: perfective verbs conjugated in the present tense generally have future meaning.

Frequently scholars project this feature of modern Russian back to the period of Old Russian. While the texts often allow for such an interpretation, we nevertheless find notable exceptions to the equation between perfective presents and future meaning. Consider the following example (cf. Schmalstieg, 1995, p. 142; Miklosich, 1860, Section IV, p. 3): изъ тогождє лѣса тєчєть Волга на въстокъ, и вътєчєть сєдмию дєсятъ жрѣлъ въ морє хвалисьскоѥ 'From the same forest the Volga flows to the east, and it flows into the Caspian Sea with seventy mouths' (Primary Chronicle). Here in describing the geography of the region, a future interpretation would be the least likely for the verb вътєчєть 'flows into'. However if we were simply to assume that the Old Russian system of verbal aspect functions equivalently to that of modern Russian, we would be forced to conclude that вътєчєть is perfective by virtue of being prefixed; and since it is a prefixed verb in the present tense, it should as a result have future meaning. The example above makes clear that we must be more nuanced with our attempts to tease out the aspect of Old Russian verbs.

Some verbs seem to show more reliably a particular aspectual value, such as дати 'to give', which is generally deemed perfective. Moreover, some suffixes seem to derive perfective verbs from imperfective roots. One of the more consistent of these suffixes is -ну- (cf. OCS -нѫ-). Stems with this nasal suffix generally appear to be perfective, as the following example suggests (Ostromir Gospel, Matthew 24.29, cf. Sreznevskij, 1893, vol. 2, p.282; Matthews, 1960, p.204).

Chapter	 	Ostromir Gospel	 	Greek Text	 	English Translation
Matthew 24.29a	 	слъньце мрькнеть	 	ho he:lios skotisthe:setai	 	the sun shall be darkened
Matthew 24.29b	 	и луна не дасть свѣта	 	kai he: sele:ne: ou do:sei to pheggos aute:s	 	and the moon shall give no light
Here we see that the present tense forms of both дати 'to give' and мрькнути 'to become dark' both translate future tense forms in the Greek. As mentioned in our discussion of the non-past (Section 45), this could merely result from the fact that Old Russian has no simple morphological future, and the present tense forms could function as a future in the same way as the English continuous present in, e.g., I am leaving tomorrow. However other similar examples, as well as lexical pairing with derived imperfective forms, suggest that instances of the -ну- suffix do in fact correspond generally to perfective verbs.

Some of the suffixes found in Old Russian for deriving imperfective verbs from perfective ones likely extend back into the Common Slavic period. Chief among these suffixes was -a-j-. This could be added to a perfective stem to result in an imperfective stem. When preceded by an intervocalic -j-, the -j- was often replaced by the labial glide -v- before adding the -a-j- suffix. In the instance of verbs from the -i- class, before the -a-j- suffix the -i- became the glide -j- and generally triggered j-palatalization of the preceding consonant. With verbs exhibiting the -nu- suffix, the -nu- suffix itself generally dropped before addition of -a-j-. Moreover the suffix -ov-a- seems also to have been used to derive imperfectives from perfectives. The following chart shows various examples of derivation via the suffixes -a-j- and -ov-a- in the instance of different original root formations (Schenker, 1995).

Stem Type	 	Suffix	 	Perfective	 	Imperfective	 	Meaning
Consonant	 	-a-j-	 	pad-	 	pad-a-j-	 	fall
 	 	 	 	sěd-	 	sěd-a-j-	 	sit
 	 	 	 	po-greb-	 	po-grěb-a-j	 	bury
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Sonant	 	-a-j-	 	na-čĭn-	 	na-čin-a-j-	 	begin
 	 	 	 	vŭz-ĭm-	 	vŭz-im-a-j-	 	take up
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Semivocalic	 	-v-a-j-	 	u-my-j-	 	u-my-v-a-j-	 	wash
 	 	 	 	po-zna-j-	 	po-zna-v-a-j-	 	recognize
 	 	 	 	po-ži-j-	 	po-ži-v-a-j-	 	live
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
-i-	 	-a-j-	 	po-gruz-i-	 	po-gruž-a-j-	 	immerse
 	 	 	 	u-krěp-i-	 	u-krěpl'-a-j-	 	strengthen
 	 	 	 	vŭ-pros-i-	 	vŭ-praš-a-j-	 	ask
 	 	-ov-a-	 	po-sob-i-	 	po-sob-ov-a-	 	help
 	 	 	 	jĭz-věst-i-	 	jĭz-věst-ov-a-	 	announce
 	 	 	 	kup-i-	 	kup-ov-a-	 	buy
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
-nu-	 	-a-j-	 	jĭz-čez-nu-	 	jĭz-čaz-a-j-	 	disappear
 	 	 	 	u-gas-nu-	 	u-gas-a-j-	 	extinguish
 	 	 	 	u-to[p]-nu-	 	u-tap-a-j-	 	drown
 	 	 	 	kos-nu-	 	kas-a-j-	 	touch
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
-a-	 	-a-j-	 	na-kaz-a-	 	na-kaz-a-j-	 	instruct
 	 	 	 	po-maz-a-	 	po-maz-a-j-	 	anoint
 	 	 	 	sŭ-zĭd-a-	 	sŭ-zid-a-j-	 	build
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
-ě-	 	-a-j-	 	po-mĭn-ě-	 	po-min-a-j-	 	remember
 	 	 	 	vŭz-zĭr-ě-	 	vŭz-zir-a-j-	 	look up
 	 	 	 	svĭt-ě-	 	svit-a-j-	 	grow light
50.2 Further Refinements
As we have seen above, the concepts of tense and aspect are logically distinct: tense speaks to the relative placement of actions on a timeline, while aspect describes its shape or extent along the timeline. But while these two concepts may be logically isolated, we must confront the fact that they do not appear in isolation in Old Russian or any other of the Slavic languages. Senn (1949) states:

 	 	In Russian and Polish, aspect distinctions are not more essential than tense distinctions. The two systems belong together and are interlaced.
The same applies to Old Russian, perhaps even more so because of the difficulty in understanding just how one might concretely assign a given aspectual value to a particular instance of a particular verb when no native speaker remains who may verify the assertion.

Bermel (1995) in particular points out that an approach to identifying Old Russian verbal aspect that relies too heavily on morphological characteristics will inevitably be plagued with difficulties. In particular he emphasizes the interplay of morphology with the lexical aspect displayed by the verbal roots themselves. The following chart provides the categories of lexical aspect outlined by Bermel (1995).

Lexical Aspect	 	Subtype	 	Description	 	Example	 	Meaning
Telic	 	 	 	goal-oriented activity	 	умирати	 	die
 	 	 	 	 	 	написати	 	write
 	 	 	 	 	 	сказати	 	say
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Atelic	 	 	 	no explicit goal	 	 	 	 
 	 	Stative	 	state	 	стояти	 	stand
 	 	 	 	 	 	держати	 	hold
 	 	Actions	 	action	 	плакати	 	cry
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Punctual	 	 	 	can be reduced to a single moment	 	видѣти	 	see
 	 	 	 	 	 	просити	 	ask
 	 	 	 	 	 	стрѣлити	 	fire a shot
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Non-Punctual	 	 	 	cannot be reduced to a single moment	 	писати	 	write
 	 	 	 	 	 	искати	 	search
The above list of lexical aspects is by no means exhaustive. But it certainly isolates some of the major issues: does the action bring about a particular result? (Telic.) Does it denote a state or action with no discernable result? (Atelic.) And so forth. As we have seen above with the English example I was shooting, the interpretation of the phrase as a whole results from a unique mixture of lexical and morphological aspect. The context as a whole, therefore, must guide our understanding of both lexical and morphological aspect in Old Russian:

 	 	Context can also influence how an act is perceived, and it is crucial to understanding O[ld]R[ussian] aspect. Instead of classifying OR forms directly as having "perfective" and "imperfective" meanings, a more fruitful approach is to describe the underlying contextual meanings reflected in the forms, and then to decide how and when these meanings map onto an OR aspectual paradigm (Bermel, 1995).
In particular, we should seek whether certain forms of purported aspectual pairs of verbs tend to appear more frequently in certain contexts and with certain interpretations. By isolating such tendencies we may hope to ascertain information on the underlying aspectual distinction. Bermel (1995) provides an example of such methodology in the context of the Primary Chronicle. In particular, he illustrates the proposed opposition between a presumably root-perfective пасти 'to fall' and its derived imperfective partner падати 'to fall', as well as that between the presumably perfective поставити 'to place, appoint, build' and its derived imperfective partner поставлати, with the same meaning. Consider the following examples from the Laurentian Codex cited in Bermel (1995).

якоже пророкъ глаголааше падете пред врагꙑ вашими 'As the prophet said: you will fall before your enemies'.
поставлю ѹношю кнѧзѧ имъ 'I will appoint a youth as prince over them'.
посем же быстъ звѣздамъ теченьє с вечера до заѹтрьꙗ ꙗко мнѣти всемъ ꙗко падають звѣздꙑ 'After that there was a hail of stars from evening until morning, so as for everyone to think that the stars were falling'.
не вѣдꙑи яко Богъ даєть власть ємуже хощеть, поставлѧєтъ бо цєсарѧ и кнѧзѧ Вꙑшнии, ємужє хощеть дасть '... not knowing that God gives power to whomever he wants, for the Highest One appoints as kings and princes whomever he wants to give (it) to'.
This illustrates the procedure by which one can correlate interpretation with aspectual value, given enough context to establish the correctness of the interpretation. In particular we find above that the interpretations support the assignment of perfective aspect to пасти and imperfective to падати, and similarly for поставити and поставлати, respectively. But the procedure must include enough data to establish a pattern: the interpretation and form must coincide regularly before any aspectual value can be determined with relative accuracy.

Old Russian Online
Selected Annotated Bibliography
Todd B. Krause
Texts
The works below provide sources in which the reader may find additional Old Russian texts in the original language. For the most part these works have little or no commentary in English.

Medieval Slavic Texts. Volume 1: Old and Middle Russian Texts, Charles E. Gribble; Slavica: Cambridge, MA, 1973. A wide-ranging collection of texts that are difficult to access otherwise. Aside from some brief comments at the beginning, the text consists of photocopied reproductions of selections from other publications, almost exclusively in modern Russian.
Chronica Nestoris: Textum Russico-Slovenicum, Franz von Miklosich; Vienna, 1860. A nice edition of the Primary Chronicle with useful appendices. The spelling is normalized using a system that more closely resembles Old Church Slavonic orthography than the modern Russian orthography typically encountered. Commentary in Latin.
A Reader in Old Church Slavonic and Old Russian, N. P. Vakar; Massachusetts. A short selection of texts. Useful for illustrating the similarities of OCS and Old Russian, as well as giving a few nice examples of handwriting. A very brief glossary at the end provides the Greek and modern Russian equivalents.
Grammars
The following works provide useful references, and in some instances useful introductions, to the grammar of the Old Russian language. Unfortunately only one such source exists in English.

Altslawische Grammatik, Hans Holm Bielfeldt; Veb Max Niemeyer Verlag, 1961. Strictly speaking a grammar of Old Church Slavonic. But throughout the author mentions how Old Russian and modern Russian distinguish themselves from Old Church Slavonic, and this allows it to serve as a guide to Old Russian in a vein similar to that of Schmalstieg. In German.
Grammaire du Vieux-Russe, Jean-Yves le Guillou; Editions Klincksieck, Paris, 1972. Essentially a sketch of the grammar of Old Russian. Very concise, but useful. In French.
An Introduction to Old Russian, William R. Schmalstieg; Journal of Indo-European Studies Monograph Series, 1995. An introductory grammar with some short reading selections and a glossary. Perhaps the only truly introductory text focused specifically on Old Russian. Aimed at those with an interest in historical linguistics, with more emphasis on phonological evolution than on, say, matters of literary style or the broader historical context of the texts.
Dictionaries
The search for a dictionary of Old Russian proves to be an ongoing struggle. The assumption underlying most, if not all, dictionaries is that one would only study Old Russian if one had first learned modern Russian. Where this assumption does not hold, one is assumed to be familiar with Latin and Greek. A viable dictionary of Old Russian with meanings in English is still wanting.

Concise Dictionary of Old Russian: 11th-17th Centuries, Horace G. Lunt; Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1970. An exceedingly brief dictionary, or gloss, of Old Russian. Glosses are from Old Russian into modern Russian, no definitions in English.
Lexicon Palaeoslovenico-Graeco-Latinum, Franz von Miklosich; Vienna 1865. The term "Old Slavonic" in the title is taken in the widest sense, and the entries include vocabulary from Old Church Slavonic and Old Russian among others. As the title suggests, the glosses of Slavic headwords are given in Greek and Latin, so of admittedly limited use to the scholar without a knowledge of one of those languages. But the only dictionary of its sort to cover such a range of vocabulary, and for this reason alone it is useful, even if one needs a dictionary of Greek or Latin at hand. Commentary in Latin.
Materialy dlja Slovarja Drevne-Russkago Jazyka, I. I. Sreznevskij (3 Volumes); St. Petersburg, 1893-1912. Until rather recently, one of the gold standards of dictionaries on Old Russian; replete with useful citations. The orthography of the headwords will appear somewhat antiquated to the reader accustomed to editions of texts produced more recently (for example, ê typically appears where more recent texts write ja). All definitions and commentary in modern Russian.
Linguistic History
The following texts are not grammars of Old Russian proper. Rather they provide overviews, some more and some less technical, of the development of the Russian language throughout history, or of the Slavic language family as a whole. Inasmuch as they treat of the earliest stages of the Russian language, or Common Slavic as a whole, they still prove useful in trying to understand Old Russian on its own terms.

Russian and the Slavonic Languages, W. J. Entwistle and W. A. Morison; Faber and Faber. The initial chapters provide a detailed and readable account of the early distribution of the Slavs. Particularly useful for numerous references to early historical works in Greek and Latin, with which the authors show greater familiarity. The work met with scholarly criticism for certain inconsistencies of presentation and lack of familiarity with the less central members of the Slavic language family, this perhaps due in some measure to the hastened wartime preparation of the original edition.
Russische Historische Grammatik, Valentin Kiparsky; Vols. 1-3; Carl Winter, 1967. Taken as the standard reference on the evolution of Russian phonology, morphology, and lexicon from the earliest period. In German.
Russian Historical Grammar, W. K. Matthews; Athlone Press, 1960. Perhaps the most readable of the historical grammars of Russian, this has an easy-going style and short sections on a wide range of topics. Includes a selection of short texts from different historical periods at the end. The author passed away suddenly during the editing process, and the book was published posthumously by his students.
The Dawn of Slavic, Alexander M. Schenker; Yale University Press, 1995. One of the more recent works providing an overview of Slavic historical linguistics. Authoritative, up-to-date, wide-ranging, and easy to read. This has provided a new standard for overviews of the development of the Slavic language family. The linguistic development is situated within the historical context, and several textual samples are provided along with photographic images. Highly recommended.
A Prehistory of Slavic, George Y. Shevelov; Carl Winter, 1964. Comprehensive account of the historical phonology of the Slavic languages. Concise statements of historical development together with numerous examples and a select bibliography dedicated to each specific phonetic change under discussion.
A History of the Russian Language, A. A. Sokolsky; Imp. Taravilla. Suc. de G. Saez, Madrid, 1966. A straightforward account of the history of the Russian language. Brief and easy to follow, with a lively writing style. Includes a nice selection of short texts rendered in the original, in modern Russian, and in English.
The Russian Language: A Brief History, G. O. Vinokur (trans. M. A. Forsyth); Cambridge University Press, 1971. A short but useful description of the evolution of the Russian language.
A Linguistic History of Russia to the End of the Eighteenth Century, A.P. Vlasto; Oxford, 1986. A useful treatment of the history of the Russian language (not of Russian itself). Tersely written, in the style of classroom notes. It must be used with caution. Frequently arguments regarding grammatical features proper to one particular historical period are supported with examples from later periods. And there is a general lack of clarity as to the source from which numerous examples are drawn.
History and Culture
The texts listed below treat not the language, but rather the broader historical context surrounding the development of the East Slavic tribes, as well as the cultures with which they interacted.

An Atlas of Russian and East European History, Arthur E. Adams, Ian M. Matley, and William O. McCagg; Praeger, 1966. An extremely useful work for the visually oriented. Brief descriptions of historical trends, changes, and movements are astutely illustrated by well-drawn maps. Highly recommended.
The Viking, Bertil Almgren et al.; Crescent, 1975. A wide-ranging survey of numerous aspects of Viking culture. Large-format and well illustrated. Useful in the present context for an extended discussion of Viking trade in the regions inhabited by the Rus.
The Slavs, Marija Gimbutas; Thames & Hudson, 1971. Long an essential reference for students of the prehistory of Slavs. In addition to a detailed overview of the archaeological evidence up to the time of publication, it also provides a useful summary of some of the earliest documentary evidence from outside sources.
A Companion to Russian History, ed. Abbott Gleason; Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. A useful collection of insightful essays on a wide array of topics throughout Russian history.
Russia: A Concise History, Ronald Hingley; Thames & Hudson, 2003. A well written, engaging history of Russia.
Reinterpreting Russian History, Daniel H. Kaiser and Gary Marker; Oxford, 1994.
Russian Myths, Elizabeth Warner; British Museum Press & University of Texas Press, Austin, 2002. A brief overview of central issues in the study of Russian myths. Well written, intended for the non-specialist.
Historical Sources
The texts below contain primary sources pertinent to the understanding of the history and culture of the early East Slavs. Much of it comes in the form of personal travel accounts.

Beazley, C. R. (1903). The Texts and Versions of John de Plano Carpini and William de Rubruquis, (1st ed., pp. 1-373). London: Hakluyt Society. Retrieved from http://archive.org/details/textsversionsofj00hakluoft
St. Bertin, ed. G. Waitz. (1883). Annales Bertiniani, Hannover. (http://books.google.com/books?id=RCsKAAAAIAAJ&source=gbs_similarbooks)
Liutprand of Cremona. De Constantinopoleos nominibus, Cap. III. Published in Reuber (1584).
Reuber, Julius. (1584). Veterum scriptorum, qui caesarum et imperatorum germanicorum res per aliquot secula gestas, literis mandarunt, Frankfurt. (http://books.google.com/books?id=VCk-AAAAcAAJ&source=gbs_navlinks_s)
Indo-European Context
The following lists some sources useful for understanding the larger Indo-European framework in which the Slavic language family forms but one particular subgroup.

The Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World, J. P. Mallory and Douglas Q. Adams; Oxford, 2006. An excellent introduction to the entirety of Indo-European studies. Discussions range from the reconstruction of morphological forms, to the Indo-European lexicon, to matters of interpretation of Indo-European myth and culture. The discussion of the lexicon forms a brief recapitulation and modernization of Buck's Dictionary of Selected Synonyms in the Principal Indo-European Languages, dividing the lexicon into semantic categories and discussing the etymologies of words focused on related themes. Highly recommended.
Articles
The following list provides references to some of the secondary literature consulted in the preparation of these lessons.

Andreyev, Nikolay (1962). "Pagan and Christian Elements in Old Russia." Slavic Review, 21(1), 16-23.
Bermel, N. (1995). "Aspect and the Shape of Action in Old Russian." Russian Linguistics, 19(3), 333-348.
Dewey, H. W., & Kleimola, A. M. (1984). "Russian Collective Consciousness." The Slavonic and East European Review, 62(2), 180-191. doi:10.2307/4208850
Coupland, Simon (2003). "The Vikings on the Continent in Myth and History." History, 88(290), 186-203.
Cross, Samuel Hazzard (1946). "The Scandinavian Infiltration into Early Russia." Speculum, 21(4), 505-514.
Forsyth, James (1972). "The Nature and Development of the Aspectual Opposition in the Russian Verb." The Slavonic and East European Review, 50(121), 493-506.
Gribble, C. E. (1989). "Omissions of the Jer Vowels in Early East Slavic Manuscripts." Russian Linguistics, 13(1), 1-14.
Labunka, Miroslav (1988). "Religious Centers and Their Missions to Kievan Rus': From Ol'ga to Volodimer." Harvard Ukrainian Studies, 12/13, 159-193.
Lunt, Horace G. (1987). "On the Relationship of Old Church Slavonic to the Written Language of Early Rus'." Russian Linguistics, 11(2/3), 133-162.
Lunt, Horace G. (1980). "Notes on the Imperfect in Early East Slavic." The Slavic and East European Journal, 24(1), 91-97.
Lunt, Horace G. (1951). "Russian and the Slavonic Languages by W. J. Entwhistle; W. A. Morrison." Language, 27(1), 82-94.
Majeska, George (2009). "Rus' and the Byzantine Empire." In Gleason, A Companion to Russian History, 51-65.
Matthews, W. K. (1957). "The Phonetic Basis of Pleophony in East Slavonic." The Slavonic and East European Review, 36(86), 94-99.
Matthews, W. K. (1953). "The Russian Language before 1700." The Slavonic and East European Review, 31(77), 364-387.
Matthews, W. K. (1951). "The Pronunciation of Mediaeval Russian." The Slavonic and East European Review, 30(74), 87-111.
Montgomery, James E. (2000). "Ibn Fadlan and the Rusiyyah." Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies, 3(1), 1-25.
Ostrowski, Donald (2009). "The Mongols and Rus': Eight Paradigms." In Gleason, A Companion to Russian History, 66-86.
Riasanovsky, N. (1947). "The Norman Theory of the Origin of the Russian State." Russian Review, 7(1), 96-110.
Senn, Alfred (1949). "Verbal Aspects in Germanic, Slavic, and Baltic." Language, 25(4), 402-409.
Tolochko, Petro (1987). "Religious Sites in Kiev During the Reign of Volodimer Sviatoslavich." Harvard Ukrainian Studies, 11(3/4), 317-322.
Zguta, Russell (1972). "Kievan 'Byliny': Their Enigmatic Disappearance from the Kievan Territory." Journal of the Folklore Institute, 9(2/3), 185-193.